Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

9

Chapter 1

Essential Ideas

Figure 1.1 Chemical substances and processes are essential for our existence, providing sustenance, keeping us
clean and healthy, fabricating electronic devices, enabling transportation, and much more. (credit “left”: modification
of work by “vxla”/Flickr; credit “left middle”: modification of work by “the Italian voice”/Flickr; credit “right middle”:
modification of work by Jason Trim; credit “right”: modification of work by “gosheshe”/Flickr)

Chapter Outline
1.1 Chemistry in Context
1.2 Phases and Classification of Matter
1.3 Physical and Chemical Properties
1.4 Measurements
1.5 Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and Precision
1.6 Mathematical Treatment of Measurement Results

Introduction
Your alarm goes off and, after hitting “snooze” once or twice, you pry yourself out of bed. You make a cup of coffee
to help you get going, and then you shower, get dressed, eat breakfast, and check your phone for messages. On your
way to school, you stop to fill your car’s gas tank, almost making you late for the first day of chemistry class. As you
find a seat in the classroom, you read the question projected on the screen: “Welcome to class! Why should we study
chemistry?”
Do you have an answer? You may be studying chemistry because it fulfills an academic requirement, but if you
consider your daily activities, you might find chemistry interesting for other reasons. Most everything you do and
encounter during your day involves chemistry. Making coffee, cooking eggs, and toasting bread involve chemistry.
The products you use—like soap and shampoo, the fabrics you wear, the electronics that keep you connected to your
world, the gasoline that propels your car—all of these and more involve chemical substances and processes. Whether
you are aware or not, chemistry is part of your everyday world. In this course, you will learn many of the essential
principles underlying the chemistry of modern-day life.

10

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

1.1 Chemistry in Context
By the end of this module, you will be able to:
• Outline the historical development of chemistry
• Provide examples of the importance of chemistry in everyday life
• Describe the scientific method
• Differentiate among hypotheses, theories, and laws
• Provide examples illustrating macroscopic, microscopic, and symbolic domains

Throughout human history, people have tried to convert matter into more useful forms. Our Stone Age ancestors
chipped pieces of flint into useful tools and carved wood into statues and toys. These endeavors involved changing the
shape of a substance without changing the substance itself. But as our knowledge increased, humans began to change
the composition of the substances as well—clay was converted into pottery, hides were cured to make garments,
copper ores were transformed into copper tools and weapons, and grain was made into bread.
Humans began to practice chemistry when they learned to control fire and use it to cook, make pottery, and smelt
metals. Subsequently, they began to separate and use specific components of matter. A variety of drugs such as aloe,
myrrh, and opium were isolated from plants. Dyes, such as indigo and Tyrian purple, were extracted from plant and
animal matter. Metals were combined to form alloys—for example, copper and tin were mixed together to make
bronze—and more elaborate smelting techniques produced iron. Alkalis were extracted from ashes, and soaps were
prepared by combining these alkalis with fats. Alcohol was produced by fermentation and purified by distillation.
Attempts to understand the behavior of matter extend back for more than 2500 years. As early as the sixth century
BC, Greek philosophers discussed a system in which water was the basis of all things. You may have heard of the
Greek postulate that matter consists of four elements: earth, air, fire, and water. Subsequently, an amalgamation of
chemical technologies and philosophical speculations were spread from Egypt, China, and the eastern Mediterranean
by alchemists, who endeavored to transform “base metals” such as lead into “noble metals” like gold, and to create
elixirs to cure disease and extend life (Figure 1.2).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

11

Figure 1.2 This portrayal shows an alchemist’s workshop circa 1580. Although alchemy made some useful
contributions to how to manipulate matter, it was not scientific by modern standards. (credit: Chemical Heritage
Foundation)

From alchemy came the historical progressions that led to modern chemistry: the isolation of drugs from natural
sources, metallurgy, and the dye industry. Today, chemistry continues to deepen our understanding and improve our
ability to harness and control the behavior of matter. This effort has been so successful that many people do not realize
either the central position of chemistry among the sciences or the importance and universality of chemistry in daily
life.

Chemistry: The Central Science
Chemistry is sometimes referred to as “the central science” due to its interconnectedness with a vast array of
other STEM disciplines (STEM stands for areas of study in the science, technology, engineering, and math fields).
Chemistry and the language of chemists play vital roles in biology, medicine, materials science, forensics,
environmental science, and many other fields (Figure 1.3). The basic principles of physics are essential for
understanding many aspects of chemistry, and there is extensive overlap between many subdisciplines within the
two fields, such as chemical physics and nuclear chemistry. Mathematics, computer science, and information theory
provide important tools that help us calculate, interpret, describe, and generally make sense of the chemical world.
Biology and chemistry converge in biochemistry, which is crucial to understanding the many complex factors and
processes that keep living organisms (such as us) alive. Chemical engineering, materials science, and nanotechnology
combine chemical principles and empirical findings to produce useful substances, ranging from gasoline to fabrics to
electronics. Agriculture, food science, veterinary science, and brewing and wine making help provide sustenance in
the form of food and drink to the world’s population. Medicine, pharmacology, biotechnology, and botany identify
and produce substances that help keep us healthy. Environmental science, geology, oceanography, and atmospheric
science incorporate many chemical ideas to help us better understand and protect our physical world. Chemical ideas
are used to help understand the universe in astronomy and cosmology.

12

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

Figure 1.3 Knowledge of chemistry is central to understanding a wide range of scientific disciplines. This diagram
shows just some of the interrelationships between chemistry and other fields.

What are some changes in matter that are essential to daily life? Digesting and assimilating food, synthesizing
polymers that are used to make clothing, containers, cookware, and credit cards, and refining crude oil into gasoline
and other products are just a few examples. As you proceed through this course, you will discover many different
examples of changes in the composition and structure of matter, how to classify these changes and how they occurred,
their causes, the changes in energy that accompany them, and the principles and laws involved. As you learn about
these things, you will be learning chemistry, the study of the composition, properties, and interactions of matter. The
practice of chemistry is not limited to chemistry books or laboratories: It happens whenever someone is involved in
changes in matter or in conditions that may lead to such changes.

The Scientific Method
Chemistry is a science based on observation and experimentation. Doing chemistry involves attempting to answer
questions and explain observations in terms of the laws and theories of chemistry, using procedures that are accepted
by the scientific community. There is no single route to answering a question or explaining an observation, but
there is an aspect common to every approach: Each uses knowledge based on experiments that can be reproduced to
verify the results. Some routes involve a hypothesis, a tentative explanation of observations that acts as a guide for
gathering and checking information. We test a hypothesis by experimentation, calculation, and/or comparison with
the experiments of others and then refine it as needed.
Some hypotheses are attempts to explain the behavior that is summarized in laws. The laws of science summarize
a vast number of experimental observations, and describe or predict some facet of the natural world. If such a
hypothesis turns out to be capable of explaining a large body of experimental data, it can reach the status of a
theory. Scientific theories are well-substantiated, comprehensive, testable explanations of particular aspects of nature.
Theories are accepted because they provide satisfactory explanations, but they can be modified if new data become
available. The path of discovery that leads from question and observation to law or hypothesis to theory, combined
with experimental verification of the hypothesis and any necessary modification of the theory, is called the scientific
method (Figure 1.4).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

13

Figure 1.4 The scientific method follows a process similar to the one shown in this diagram. All the key components
are shown, in roughly the right order. Scientific progress is seldom neat and clean: It requires open inquiry and the
reworking of questions and ideas in response to findings.

The Domains of Chemistry
Chemists study and describe the behavior of matter and energy in three different domains: macroscopic, microscopic,
and symbolic. These domains provide different ways of considering and describing chemical behavior.
Macro is a Greek word that means “large.” The macroscopic domain is familiar to us: It is the realm of everyday
things that are large enough to be sensed directly by human sight or touch. In daily life, this includes the food you eat
and the breeze you feel on your face. The macroscopic domain includes everyday and laboratory chemistry, where we
observe and measure physical and chemical properties, or changes such as density, solubility, and flammability.
The microscopic domain of chemistry is almost always visited in the imagination. Micro also comes from Greek
and means “small.” Some aspects of the microscopic domains are visible through a microscope, such as a magnified
image of graphite or bacteria. Viruses, for instance, are too small to be seen with the naked eye, but when we’re
suffering from a cold, we’re reminded of how real they are.
However, most of the subjects in the microscopic domain of chemistry—such as atoms and molecules—are too
small to be seen even with standard microscopes and often must be pictured in the mind. Other components of the
microscopic domain include ions and electrons, protons and neutrons, and chemical bonds, each of which is far too
small to see. This domain includes the individual metal atoms in a wire, the ions that compose a salt crystal, the
changes in individual molecules that result in a color change, the conversion of nutrient molecules into tissue and
energy, and the evolution of heat as bonds that hold atoms together are created.
The symbolic domain contains the specialized language used to represent components of the macroscopic and
microscopic domains. Chemical symbols (such as those used in the periodic table), chemical formulas, and chemical
equations are part of the symbolic domain, as are graphs and drawings. We can also consider calculations as part of
the symbolic domain. These symbols play an important role in chemistry because they help interpret the behavior
of the macroscopic domain in terms of the components of the microscopic domain. One of the challenges for

14

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

students learning chemistry is recognizing that the same symbols can represent different things in the macroscopic
and microscopic domains, and one of the features that makes chemistry fascinating is the use of a domain that must
be imagined to explain behavior in a domain that can be observed.
A helpful way to understand the three domains is via the essential and ubiquitous substance of water. That water is
a liquid at moderate temperatures, will freeze to form a solid at lower temperatures, and boil to form a gas at higher
temperatures (Figure 1.5) are macroscopic observations. But some properties of water fall into the microscopic
domain—what we cannot observe with the naked eye. The description of water as comprised of two hydrogen atoms
and one oxygen atom, and the explanation of freezing and boiling in terms of attractions between these molecules, is
within the microscopic arena. The formula H2O, which can describe water at either the macroscopic or microscopic
levels, is an example of the symbolic domain. The abbreviations (g) for gas, (s) for solid, and (l) for liquid are also
symbolic.

Figure 1.5 (a) Moisture in the air, icebergs, and the ocean represent water in the macroscopic domain. (b) At the
molecular level (microscopic domain), gas molecules are far apart and disorganized, solid water molecules are close
together and organized, and liquid molecules are close together and disorganized. (c) The formula H2O symbolizes
water, and (g), (s), and (l) symbolize its phases. Note that clouds are actually comprised of either very small liquid
water droplets or solid water crystals; gaseous water in our atmosphere is not visible to the naked eye, although it
may be sensed as humidity. (credit a: modification of work by “Gorkaazk”/Wikimedia Commons)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

15

1.2 Phases and Classification of Matter
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the basic properties of each physical state of matter: solid, liquid, and gas
• Define and give examples of atoms and molecules
• Classify matter as an element, compound, homogeneous mixture, or heterogeneous mixture with regard to its

physical state and composition
• Distinguish between mass and weight
• Apply the law of conservation of matter

Matter is defined as anything that occupies space and has mass, and it is all around us. Solids and liquids are more
obviously matter: We can see that they take up space, and their weight tells us that they have mass. Gases are also
matter; if gases did not take up space, a balloon would stay collapsed rather than inflate when filled with gas.
Solids, liquids, and gases are the three states of matter commonly found on earth (Figure 1.6). A solid is rigid and
possesses a definite shape. A liquid flows and takes the shape of a container, except that it forms a flat or slightly
curved upper surface when acted upon by gravity. (In zero gravity, liquids assume a spherical shape.) Both liquid and
solid samples have volumes that are very nearly independent of pressure. A gas takes both the shape and volume of
its container.

Figure 1.6 The three most common states or phases of matter are solid, liquid, and gas.

A fourth state of matter, plasma, occurs naturally in the interiors of stars. A plasma is a gaseous state of matter that
contains appreciable numbers of electrically charged particles (Figure 1.7). The presence of these charged particles
imparts unique properties to plasmas that justify their classification as a state of matter distinct from gases. In addition
to stars, plasmas are found in some other high-temperature environments (both natural and man-made), such as
lightning strikes, certain television screens, and specialized analytical instruments used to detect trace amounts of
metals.

16

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

Figure 1.7 A plasma torch can be used to cut metal. (credit: “Hypertherm”/Wikimedia Commons)

Link to Learning
In a tiny cell in a plasma television, the plasma emits ultraviolet light, which in turn
causes the display at that location to appear a specific color. The composite of
these tiny dots of color makes up the image that you see. Watch this video
(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/16plasma) to learn more about plasma and the
places you encounter it.

Some samples of matter appear to have properties of solids, liquids, and/or gases at the same time. This can occur
when the sample is composed of many small pieces. For example, we can pour sand as if it were a liquid because it
is composed of many small grains of solid sand. Matter can also have properties of more than one state when it is a
mixture, such as with clouds. Clouds appear to behave somewhat like gases, but they are actually mixtures of air (gas)
and tiny particles of water (liquid or solid).
The mass of an object is a measure of the amount of matter in it. One way to measure an object’s mass is to measure
the force it takes to accelerate the object. It takes much more force to accelerate a car than a bicycle because the car
has much more mass. A more common way to determine the mass of an object is to use a balance to compare its mass
with a standard mass.
Although weight is related to mass, it is not the same thing. Weight refers to the force that gravity exerts on an object.
This force is directly proportional to the mass of the object. The weight of an object changes as the force of gravity
changes, but its mass does not. An astronaut’s mass does not change just because she goes to the moon. But her
weight on the moon is only one-sixth her earth-bound weight because the moon’s gravity is only one-sixth that of the
earth’s. She may feel “weightless” during her trip when she experiences negligible external forces (gravitational or
any other), although she is, of course, never “massless.”
The law of conservation of matter summarizes many scientific observations about matter: It states that there is no
detectable change in the total quantity of matter present when matter converts from one type to another (a chemical
change) or changes among solid, liquid, or gaseous states (a physical change). Brewing beer and the operation of
batteries provide examples of the conservation of matter (Figure 1.8). During the brewing of beer, the ingredients
(water, yeast, grains, malt, hops, and sugar) are converted into beer (water, alcohol, carbonation, and flavoring
substances) with no actual loss of substance. This is most clearly seen during the bottling process, when glucose turns

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

17

into ethanol and carbon dioxide, and the total mass of the substances does not change. This can also be seen in a
lead-acid car battery: The original substances (lead, lead oxide, and sulfuric acid), which are capable of producing
electricity, are changed into other substances (lead sulfate and water) that do not produce electricity, with no change
in the actual amount of matter.

Figure 1.8 (a) The mass of beer precursor materials is the same as the mass of beer produced: Sugar has become
alcohol and carbonation. (b) The mass of the lead, lead oxide plates, and sulfuric acid that goes into the production of
electricity is exactly equal to the mass of lead sulfate and water that is formed.

Although this conservation law holds true for all conversions of matter, convincing examples are few and far between
because, outside of the controlled conditions in a laboratory, we seldom collect all of the material that is produced
during a particular conversion. For example, when you eat, digest, and assimilate food, all of the matter in the original
food is preserved. But because some of the matter is incorporated into your body, and much is excreted as various
types of waste, it is challenging to verify by measurement.

Atoms and Molecules
An atom is the smallest particle of an element that has the properties of that element and can enter into a chemical
combination. Consider the element gold, for example. Imagine cutting a gold nugget in half, then cutting one of the
halves in half, and repeating this process until a piece of gold remained that was so small that it could not be cut
in half (regardless of how tiny your knife may be). This minimally sized piece of gold is an atom (from the Greek
atomos, meaning “indivisible”) (Figure 1.9). This atom would no longer be gold if it were divided any further.

18

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

Figure 1.9 (a) This photograph shows a gold nugget. (b) A scanning-tunneling microscope (STM) can generate
views of the surfaces of solids, such as this image of a gold crystal. Each sphere represents one gold atom. (credit a:
modification of work by United States Geological Survey; credit b: modification of work by “Erwinrossen”/Wikimedia
Commons)

The first suggestion that matter is composed of atoms is attributed to the Greek philosophers Leucippus and
Democritus, who developed their ideas in the 5th century BCE. However, it was not until the early nineteenth century
that John Dalton (1766–1844), a British schoolteacher with a keen interest in science, supported this hypothesis with
quantitative measurements. Since that time, repeated experiments have confirmed many aspects of this hypothesis,
and it has become one of the central theories of chemistry. Other aspects of Dalton’s atomic theory are still used but
with minor revisions (details of Dalton’s theory are provided in the chapter on atoms and molecules).
An atom is so small that its size is difficult to imagine. One of the smallest things we can see with our unaided eye is
a single thread of a spider web: These strands are about 1/10,000 of a centimeter (0.0001 cm) in diameter. Although
the cross-section of one strand is almost impossible to see without a microscope, it is huge on an atomic scale. A
single carbon atom in the web has a diameter of about 0.000000015 centimeter, and it would take about 7000 carbon
atoms to span the diameter of the strand. To put this in perspective, if a carbon atom were the size of a dime, the
cross-section of one strand would be larger than a football field, which would require about 150 million carbon atom
“dimes” to cover it. (Figure 1.10) shows increasingly close microscopic and atomic-level views of ordinary cotton.

Figure 1.10 These images provide an increasingly closer view: (a) a cotton boll, (b) a single cotton fiber viewed
under an optical microscope (magnified 40 times), (c) an image of a cotton fiber obtained with an electron microscope
(much higher magnification than with the optical microscope); and (d and e) atomic-level models of the fiber (spheres
of different colors represent atoms of different elements). (credit c: modification of work by “Featheredtar”/Wikimedia
Commons)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

19

An atom is so light that its mass is also difficult to imagine. A billion lead atoms (1,000,000,000 atoms) weigh about
3 × 10−13 grams, a mass that is far too light to be weighed on even the world’s most sensitive balances. It would
require over 300,000,000,000,000 lead atoms (300 trillion, or 3 × 1014) to be weighed, and they would weigh only
0.0000001 gram.
It is rare to find collections of individual atoms. Only a few elements, such as the gases helium, neon, and argon,
consist of a collection of individual atoms that move about independently of one another. Other elements, such as the
gases hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, and chlorine, are composed of units that consist of pairs of atoms (Figure 1.11).
One form of the element phosphorus consists of units composed of four phosphorus atoms. The element sulfur exists
in various forms, one of which consists of units composed of eight sulfur atoms. These units are called molecules. A
molecule consists of two or more atoms joined by strong forces called chemical bonds. The atoms in a molecule move
around as a unit, much like the cans of soda in a six-pack or a bunch of keys joined together on a single key ring. A
molecule may consist of two or more identical atoms, as in the molecules found in the elements hydrogen, oxygen,
and sulfur, or it may consist of two or more different atoms, as in the molecules found in water. Each water molecule
is a unit that contains two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. Each glucose molecule is a unit that contains 6
carbon atoms, 12 hydrogen atoms, and 6 oxygen atoms. Like atoms, molecules are incredibly small and light. If an
ordinary glass of water were enlarged to the size of the earth, the water molecules inside it would be about the size of
golf balls.

Figure 1.11 The elements hydrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, and sulfur form molecules consisting of two or more
atoms of the same element. The compounds water, carbon dioxide, and glucose consist of combinations of atoms of
different elements.

Classifying Matter
We can classify matter into several categories. Two broad categories are mixtures and pure substances. A pure
substance has a constant composition. All specimens of a pure substance have exactly the same makeup and
properties. Any sample of sucrose (table sugar) consists of 42.1% carbon, 6.5% hydrogen, and 51.4% oxygen by
mass. Any sample of sucrose also has the same physical properties, such as melting point, color, and sweetness,
regardless of the source from which it is isolated.
We can divide pure substances into two classes: elements and compounds. Pure substances that cannot be broken
down into simpler substances by chemical changes are called elements. Iron, silver, gold, aluminum, sulfur, oxygen,
and copper are familiar examples of the more than 100 known elements, of which about 90 occur naturally on the
earth, and two dozen or so have been created in laboratories.
Pure substances that can be broken down by chemical changes are called compounds. This breakdown may produce
either elements or other compounds, or both. Mercury(II) oxide, an orange, crystalline solid, can be broken down by
heat into the elements mercury and oxygen (Figure 1.12). When heated in the absence of air, the compound sucrose
is broken down into the element carbon and the compound water. (The initial stage of this process, when the sugar is
turning brown, is known as caramelization—this is what imparts the characteristic sweet and nutty flavor to caramel

20

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

apples, caramelized onions, and caramel). Silver(I) chloride is a white solid that can be broken down into its elements,
silver and chlorine, by absorption of light. This property is the basis for the use of this compound in photographic
films and photochromic eyeglasses (those with lenses that darken when exposed to light).

Figure 1.12 (a)The compound mercury(II) oxide, (b)when heated, (c) decomposes into silvery droplets of liquid
mercury and invisible oxygen gas. (credit: modification of work by Paul Flowers)

Link to Learning
Many compounds break down when heated. This site
(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/16mercury) shows the breakdown of mercury
oxide, HgO. You can also view an example of the photochemical decomposition
of silver chloride (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/16silvchloride) (AgCl), the basis
of early photography.

The properties of combined elements are different from those in the free, or uncombined, state. For example, white
crystalline sugar (sucrose) is a compound resulting from the chemical combination of the element carbon, which is
a black solid in one of its uncombined forms, and the two elements hydrogen and oxygen, which are colorless gases
when uncombined. Free sodium, an element that is a soft, shiny, metallic solid, and free chlorine, an element that is a
yellow-green gas, combine to form sodium chloride (table salt), a compound that is a white, crystalline solid.
A mixture is composed of two or more types of matter that can be present in varying amounts and can be separated by
physical changes, such as evaporation (you will learn more about this later). A mixture with a composition that varies
from point to point is called a heterogeneous mixture. Italian dressing is an example of a heterogeneous mixture
(Figure 1.13). Its composition can vary because we can make it from varying amounts of oil, vinegar, and herbs. It is
not the same from point to point throughout the mixture—one drop may be mostly vinegar, whereas a different drop
may be mostly oil or herbs because the oil and vinegar separate and the herbs settle. Other examples of heterogeneous
mixtures are chocolate chip cookies (we can see the separate bits of chocolate, nuts, and cookie dough) and granite
(we can see the quartz, mica, feldspar, and more).
A homogeneous mixture, also called a solution, exhibits a uniform composition and appears visually the same
throughout. An example of a solution is a sports drink, consisting of water, sugar, coloring, flavoring, and electrolytes
mixed together uniformly (Figure 1.13). Each drop of a sports drink tastes the same because each drop contains
the same amounts of water, sugar, and other components. Note that the composition of a sports drink can vary—it
could be made with somewhat more or less sugar, flavoring, or other components, and still be a sports drink. Other
examples of homogeneous mixtures include air, maple syrup, gasoline, and a solution of salt in water.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

21

Figure 1.13 (a) Oil and vinegar salad dressing is a heterogeneous mixture because its composition is not uniform
throughout. (b) A commercial sports drink is a homogeneous mixture because its composition is uniform throughout.
(credit a “left”: modification of work by John Mayer; credit a “right”: modification of work by Umberto Salvagnin; credit
b “left: modification of work by Jeff Bedford)

Although there are just over 100 elements, tens of millions of chemical compounds result from different combinations
of these elements. Each compound has a specific composition and possesses definite chemical and physical properties
by which we can distinguish it from all other compounds. And, of course, there are innumerable ways to combine
elements and compounds to form different mixtures. A summary of how to distinguish between the various major
classifications of matter is shown in (Figure 1.14).

Figure 1.14 Depending on its properties, a given substance can be classified as a homogeneous mixture, a
heterogeneous mixture, a compound, or an element.

Eleven elements make up about 99% of the earth’s crust and atmosphere (Table 1.1). Oxygen constitutes nearly onehalf and silicon about one-quarter of the total quantity of these elements. A majority of elements on earth are found
in chemical combinations with other elements; about one-quarter of the elements are also found in the free state.
Elemental Composition of Earth
Element

Symbol

Percent Mass

Element

Symbol

Percent Mass

oxygen

O

49.20

chlorine

Cl

0.19

silicon

Si

25.67

phosphorus

P

0.11

aluminum

Al

7.50

manganese

Mn

0.09

Table 1.1

22

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

Elemental Composition of Earth
Element

Symbol

Percent Mass

Element

Symbol

Percent Mass

iron

Fe

4.71

carbon

C

0.08

calcium

Ca

3.39

sulfur

S

0.06

sodium

Na

2.63

barium

Ba

0.04

potassium

K

2.40

nitrogen

N

0.03

magnesium

Mg

1.93

fluorine

F

0.03

hydrogen

H

0.87

strontium

Sr

0.02

titanium

Ti

0.58

all others

-

0.47

Table 1.1

Chemistry in Everyday Life
Decomposition of Water / Production of Hydrogen
Water consists of the elements hydrogen and oxygen combined in a 2 to 1 ratio. Water can be broken down
into hydrogen and oxygen gases by the addition of energy. One way to do this is with a battery or power supply,
as shown in (Figure 1.15).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

Figure 1.15 The decomposition of water is shown at the macroscopic, microscopic, and symbolic levels.
The battery provides an electric current (microscopic) that decomposes water. At the macroscopic level, the
liquid separates into the gases hydrogen (on the left) and oxygen (on the right). Symbolically, this change is
presented by showing how liquid H2O separates into H2 and O2 gases.
The breakdown of water involves a rearrangement of the atoms in water molecules into different molecules,
each composed of two hydrogen atoms and two oxygen atoms, respectively. Two water molecules form
one oxygen molecule and two hydrogen molecules. The representation for what occurs,
2H 2 O(l) ⟶ 2H 2(g) + O 2(g), will be explored in more depth in later chapters.
The two gases produced have distinctly different properties. Oxygen is not flammable but is required for
combustion of a fuel, and hydrogen is highly flammable and a potent energy source. How might this knowledge
be applied in our world? One application involves research into more fuel-efficient transportation. Fuel-cell
vehicles (FCV) run on hydrogen instead of gasoline (Figure 1.16). They are more efficient than vehicles
with internal combustion engines, are nonpolluting, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions, making us less
dependent on fossil fuels. FCVs are not yet economically viable, however, and current hydrogen production
depends on natural gas. If we can develop a process to economically decompose water, or produce hydrogen
in another environmentally sound way, FCVs may be the way of the future.

23

24

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

Figure 1.16 A fuel cell generates electrical energy from hydrogen and oxygen via an electrochemical
process and produces only water as the waste product.

Chemistry in Everyday Life
Chemistry of Cell Phones
Imagine how different your life would be without cell phones (Figure 1.17) and other smart devices. Cell
phones are made from numerous chemical substances, which are extracted, refined, purified, and assembled
using an extensive and in-depth understanding of chemical principles. About 30% of the elements that are
found in nature are found within a typical smart phone. The case/body/frame consists of a combination
of sturdy, durable polymers comprised primarily of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen [acrylonitrile
butadiene styrene (ABS) and polycarbonate thermoplastics], and light, strong, structural metals, such as
aluminum, magnesium, and iron. The display screen is made from a specially toughened glass (silica glass
strengthened by the addition of aluminum, sodium, and potassium) and coated with a material to make it
conductive (such as indium tin oxide). The circuit board uses a semiconductor material (usually silicon);
commonly used metals like copper, tin, silver, and gold; and more unfamiliar elements such as yttrium,
praseodymium, and gadolinium. The battery relies upon lithium ions and a variety of other materials, including
iron, cobalt, copper, polyethylene oxide, and polyacrylonitrile.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

25

Figure 1.17 Almost one-third of naturally occurring elements are used to make a cell phone. (credit:
modification of work by John Taylor)

1.3 Physical and Chemical Properties
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify properties of and changes in matter as physical or chemical
• Identify properties of matter as extensive or intensive

The characteristics that enable us to distinguish one substance from another are called properties. A physical
property is a characteristic of matter that is not associated with a change in its chemical composition. Familiar
examples of physical properties include density, color, hardness, melting and boiling points, and electrical
conductivity. We can observe some physical properties, such as density and color, without changing the physical state
of the matter observed. Other physical properties, such as the melting temperature of iron or the freezing temperature
of water, can only be observed as matter undergoes a physical change. A physical change is a change in the state or
properties of matter without any accompanying change in its chemical composition (the identities of the substances
contained in the matter). We observe a physical change when wax melts, when sugar dissolves in coffee, and when
steam condenses into liquid water (Figure 1.18). Other examples of physical changes include magnetizing and
demagnetizing metals (as is done with common antitheft security tags) and grinding solids into powders (which can
sometimes yield noticeable changes in color). In each of these examples, there is a change in the physical state, form,
or properties of the substance, but no change in its chemical composition.

26

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

Figure 1.18 (a) Wax undergoes a physical change when solid wax is heated and forms liquid wax. (b) Steam
condensing inside a cooking pot is a physical change, as water vapor is changed into liquid water. (credit a:
modification of work by “95jb14”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modification of work by “mjneuby”/Flickr)

The change of one type of matter into another type (or the inability to change) is a chemical property. Examples of
chemical properties include flammability, toxicity, acidity, reactivity (many types), and heat of combustion. Iron, for
example, combines with oxygen in the presence of water to form rust; chromium does not oxidize (Figure 1.19).
Nitroglycerin is very dangerous because it explodes easily; neon poses almost no hazard because it is very unreactive.

Figure 1.19 (a) One of the chemical properties of iron is that it rusts; (b) one of the chemical properties of chromium
is that it does not. (credit a: modification of work by Tony Hisgett; credit b: modification of work by “Atoma”/Wikimedia
Commons)

To identify a chemical property, we look for a chemical change. A chemical change always produces one or more
types of matter that differ from the matter present before the change. The formation of rust is a chemical change
because rust is a different kind of matter than the iron, oxygen, and water present before the rust formed. The
explosion of nitroglycerin is a chemical change because the gases produced are very different kinds of matter from the
original substance. Other examples of chemical changes include reactions that are performed in a lab (such as copper
reacting with nitric acid), all forms of combustion (burning), and food being cooked, digested, or rotting (Figure
1.20).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

27

Figure 1.20 (a) Copper and nitric acid undergo a chemical change to form copper nitrate and brown, gaseous
nitrogen dioxide. (b) During the combustion of a match, cellulose in the match and oxygen from the air undergo a
chemical change to form carbon dioxide and water vapor. (c) Cooking red meat causes a number of chemical
changes, including the oxidation of iron in myoglobin that results in the familiar red-to-brown color change. (d) A
banana turning brown is a chemical change as new, darker (and less tasty) substances form. (credit b: modification of
work by Jeff Turner; credit c: modification of work by Gloria Cabada-Leman; credit d: modification of work by Roberto
Verzo)

Properties of matter fall into one of two categories. If the property depends on the amount of matter present, it is an
extensive property. The mass and volume of a substance are examples of extensive properties; for instance, a gallon
of milk has a larger mass and volume than a cup of milk. The value of an extensive property is directly proportional
to the amount of matter in question. If the property of a sample of matter does not depend on the amount of matter
present, it is an intensive property. Temperature is an example of an intensive property. If the gallon and cup of
milk are each at 20 °C (room temperature), when they are combined, the temperature remains at 20 °C. As another
example, consider the distinct but related properties of heat and temperature. A drop of hot cooking oil spattered on
your arm causes brief, minor discomfort, whereas a pot of hot oil yields severe burns. Both the drop and the pot of oil
are at the same temperature (an intensive property), but the pot clearly contains much more heat (extensive property).

Chemistry in Everyday Life
Hazard Diamond
You may have seen the symbol shown in Figure 1.21 on containers of chemicals in a laboratory or workplace.
Sometimes called a “fire diamond” or “hazard diamond,” this chemical hazard diamond provides valuable
information that briefly summarizes the various dangers of which to be aware when working with a particular

28

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

substance.

Figure 1.21 The National Fire Protection Agency (NFPA) hazard diamond summarizes the major hazards of
a chemical substance.
The National Fire Protection Agency (NFPA) 704 Hazard Identification System was developed by NFPA to
provide safety information about certain substances. The system details flammability, reactivity, health, and
other hazards. Within the overall diamond symbol, the top (red) diamond specifies the level of fire hazard
(temperature range for flash point). The blue (left) diamond indicates the level of health hazard. The yellow
(right) diamond describes reactivity hazards, such as how readily the substance will undergo detonation or a
violent chemical change. The white (bottom) diamond points out special hazards, such as if it is an oxidizer
(which allows the substance to burn in the absence of air/oxygen), undergoes an unusual or dangerous
reaction with water, is corrosive, acidic, alkaline, a biological hazard, radioactive, and so on. Each hazard is
rated on a scale from 0 to 4, with 0 being no hazard and 4 being extremely hazardous.

While many elements differ dramatically in their chemical and physical properties, some elements have similar
properties. We can identify sets of elements that exhibit common behaviors. For example, many elements conduct
heat and electricity well, whereas others are poor conductors. These properties can be used to sort the elements into
three classes: metals (elements that conduct well), nonmetals (elements that conduct poorly), and metalloids (elements
that have properties of both metals and nonmetals).
The periodic table is a table of elements that places elements with similar properties close together (Figure 1.22).
You will learn more about the periodic table as you continue your study of chemistry.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

29

Figure 1.22 The periodic table shows how elements may be grouped according to certain similar properties. Note
the background color denotes whether an element is a metal, metalloid, or nonmetal, whereas the element symbol
color indicates whether it is a solid, liquid, or gas.

1.4 Measurements
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the process of measurement
• Identify the three basic parts of a quantity
• Describe the properties and units of length, mass, volume, density, temperature, and time
• Perform basic unit calculations and conversions in the metric and other unit systems

Measurements provide the macroscopic information that is the basis of most of the hypotheses, theories, and laws
that describe the behavior of matter and energy in both the macroscopic and microscopic domains of chemistry. Every
measurement provides three kinds of information: the size or magnitude of the measurement (a number); a standard of
comparison for the measurement (a unit); and an indication of the uncertainty of the measurement. While the number
and unit are explicitly represented when a quantity is written, the uncertainty is an aspect of the measurement result
that is more implicitly represented and will be discussed later.
The number in the measurement can be represented in different ways, including decimal form and scientific notation.

30

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

(Scientific notation is also known as exponential notation; a review of this topic can be found in Appendix B.)
For example, the maximum takeoff weight of a Boeing 777-200ER airliner is 298,000 kilograms, which can also be
written as 2.98 × 105 kg. The mass of the average mosquito is about 0.0000025 kilograms, which can be written as
2.5 × 10−6 kg.
Units, such as liters, pounds, and centimeters, are standards of comparison for measurements. When we buy a 2-liter
bottle of a soft drink, we expect that the volume of the drink was measured, so it is two times larger than the volume
that everyone agrees to be 1 liter. The meat used to prepare a 0.25-pound hamburger is measured so it weighs onefourth as much as 1 pound. Without units, a number can be meaningless, confusing, or possibly life threatening.
Suppose a doctor prescribes phenobarbital to control a patient’s seizures and states a dosage of “100” without
specifying units. Not only will this be confusing to the medical professional giving the dose, but the consequences
can be dire: 100 mg given three times per day can be effective as an anticonvulsant, but a single dose of 100 g is more
than 10 times the lethal amount.
We usually report the results of scientific measurements in SI units, an updated version of the metric system, using
the units listed in Table 1.2. Other units can be derived from these base units. The standards for these units are fixed
by international agreement, and they are called the International System of Units or SI Units (from the French, Le
Système International d’Unités). SI units have been used by the United States National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) since 1964.
Base Units of the SI System
Property Measured

Name of Unit

Symbol of Unit

length

meter

m

mass

kilogram

kg

time

second

s

temperature

kelvin

K

electric current

ampere

A

amount of substance

mole

mol

luminous intensity

candela

cd

Table 1.2

Sometimes we use units that are fractions or multiples of a base unit. Ice cream is sold in quarts (a familiar, non-SI
base unit), pints (0.5 quart), or gallons (4 quarts). We also use fractions or multiples of units in the SI system, but
these fractions or multiples are always powers of 10. Fractional or multiple SI units are named using a prefix and the
name of the base unit. For example, a length of 1000 meters is also called a kilometer because the prefix kilo means
“one thousand,” which in scientific notation is 103 (1 kilometer = 1000 m = 103 m). The prefixes used and the powers
to which 10 are raised are listed in Table 1.3.
Common Unit Prefixes
Prefix

Symbol

Factor

Example

femto

f

10−15

1 femtosecond (fs) = 1 × 10−15 s (0.000000000000001 s)

pico

p

10−12

1 picometer (pm) = 1 × 10−12 m (0.000000000001 m)

nano

n

10−9

4 nanograms (ng) = 4 × 10−9 g (0.000000004 g)

Table 1.3

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

31

Common Unit Prefixes
Prefix

Symbol

Factor

Example

micro

µ

10−6

1 microliter (μL) = 1 × 10−6 L (0.000001 L)

milli

m

10−3

2 millimoles (mmol) = 2 × 10−3 mol (0.002 mol)

centi

c

10−2

7 centimeters (cm) = 7 × 10−2 m (0.07 m)

deci

d

10−1

1 deciliter (dL) = 1 × 10−1 L (0.1 L )

kilo

k

103

1 kilometer (km) = 1 × 103 m (1000 m)

mega

M

106

3 megahertz (MHz) = 3 × 106 Hz (3,000,000 Hz)

giga

G

109

8 gigayears (Gyr) = 8 × 109 yr (8,000,000,000 yr)

tera

T

1012

5 terawatts (TW) = 5 × 1012 W (5,000,000,000,000 W)

Table 1.3

Link to Learning
Need a refresher or more practice with scientific notation? Visit this site
(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/16notation) to go over the basics of scientific
notation.

SI Base Units
The initial units of the metric system, which eventually evolved into the SI system, were established in France
during the French Revolution. The original standards for the meter and the kilogram were adopted there in 1799 and
eventually by other countries. This section introduces four of the SI base units commonly used in chemistry. Other SI
units will be introduced in subsequent chapters.

Length
The standard unit of length in both the SI and original metric systems is the meter (m). A meter was originally
specified as 1/10,000,000 of the distance from the North Pole to the equator. It is now defined as the distance light
in a vacuum travels in 1/299,792,458 of a second. A meter is about 3 inches longer than a yard (Figure 1.23); one
meter is about 39.37 inches or 1.094 yards. Longer distances are often reported in kilometers (1 km = 1000 m = 103
m), whereas shorter distances can be reported in centimeters (1 cm = 0.01 m = 10−2 m) or millimeters (1 mm = 0.001
m = 10−3 m).

32

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

Figure 1.23 The relative lengths of 1 m, 1 yd, 1 cm, and 1 in. are shown (not actual size), as well as comparisons of
2.54 cm and 1 in., and of 1 m and 1.094 yd.

Mass
The standard unit of mass in the SI system is the kilogram (kg). A kilogram was originally defined as the mass of
a liter of water (a cube of water with an edge length of exactly 0.1 meter). It is now defined by a certain cylinder of
platinum-iridium alloy, which is kept in France (Figure 1.24). Any object with the same mass as this cylinder is said
to have a mass of 1 kilogram. One kilogram is about 2.2 pounds. The gram (g) is exactly equal to 1/1000 of the mass
of the kilogram (10−3 kg).

Figure 1.24 This replica prototype kilogram is housed at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
in Maryland. (credit: National Institutes of Standards and Technology)

Temperature
Temperature is an intensive property. The SI unit of temperature is the kelvin (K). The IUPAC convention is to use
kelvin (all lowercase) for the word, K (uppercase) for the unit symbol, and neither the word “degree” nor the degree
symbol (°). The degree Celsius (°C) is also allowed in the SI system, with both the word “degree” and the degree
symbol used for Celsius measurements. Celsius degrees are the same magnitude as those of kelvin, but the two scales
place their zeros in different places. Water freezes at 273.15 K (0 °C) and boils at 373.15 K (100 °C) by definition,
and normal human body temperature is approximately 310 K (37 °C). The conversion between these two units and

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

33

the Fahrenheit scale will be discussed later in this chapter.

Time
The SI base unit of time is the second (s). Small and large time intervals can be expressed with the appropriate
prefixes; for example, 3 microseconds = 0.000003 s = 3 × 10−6 and 5 megaseconds = 5,000,000 s = 5 × 106 s.
Alternatively, hours, days, and years can be used.

Derived SI Units
We can derive many units from the seven SI base units. For example, we can use the base unit of length to define a
unit of volume, and the base units of mass and length to define a unit of density.

Volume
Volume is the measure of the amount of space occupied by an object. The standard SI unit of volume is defined by
the base unit of length (Figure 1.25). The standard volume is a cubic meter (m3), a cube with an edge length of
exactly one meter. To dispense a cubic meter of water, we could build a cubic box with edge lengths of exactly one
meter. This box would hold a cubic meter of water or any other substance.
A more commonly used unit of volume is derived from the decimeter (0.1 m, or 10 cm). A cube with edge lengths of
exactly one decimeter contains a volume of one cubic decimeter (dm3). A liter (L) is the more common name for the
cubic decimeter. One liter is about 1.06 quarts.
A cubic centimeter (cm3) is the volume of a cube with an edge length of exactly one centimeter. The abbreviation cc
(for cubic centimeter) is often used by health professionals. A cubic centimeter is also called a milliliter (mL) and is
1/1000 of a liter.

Figure 1.25 (a) The relative volumes are shown for cubes of 1 m3, 1 dm3 (1 L), and 1 cm3 (1 mL) (not to scale). (b)
The diameter of a dime is compared relative to the edge length of a 1-cm3 (1-mL) cube.

34

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

Density
We use the mass and volume of a substance to determine its density. Thus, the units of density are defined by the base
units of mass and length.
The density of a substance is the ratio of the mass of a sample of the substance to its volume. The SI unit for density
is the kilogram per cubic meter (kg/m3). For many situations, however, this as an inconvenient unit, and we often
use grams per cubic centimeter (g/cm3) for the densities of solids and liquids, and grams per liter (g/L) for gases.
Although there are exceptions, most liquids and solids have densities that range from about 0.7 g/cm3 (the density of
gasoline) to 19 g/cm3 (the density of gold). The density of air is about 1.2 g/L. Table 1.4 shows the densities of some
common substances.
Densities of Common Substances
Solids

Liquids

Gases (at 25 °C and 1 atm)

ice (at 0 °C) 0.92 g/cm3

water 1.0 g/cm3

dry air 1.20 g/L

oak (wood) 0.60–0.90 g/cm3

ethanol 0.79 g/cm3

oxygen 1.31 g/L

g/cm3

nitrogen 1.14 g/L

iron 7.9

g/cm3

acetone 0.79

copper 9.0 g/cm3

glycerin 1.26 g/cm3

carbon dioxide 1.80 g/L

lead 11.3 g/cm3

olive oil 0.92 g/cm3

helium 0.16 g/L

silver 10.5 g/cm3

gasoline 0.70–0.77 g/cm3

neon 0.83 g/L

gold 19.3 g/cm3

mercury 13.6 g/cm3

radon 9.1 g/L

Table 1.4

While there are many ways to determine the density of an object, perhaps the most straightforward method involves
separately finding the mass and volume of the object, and then dividing the mass of the sample by its volume. In
the following example, the mass is found directly by weighing, but the volume is found indirectly through length
measurements.
density = mass
volume

Example 1.1
Calculation of Density
Gold—in bricks, bars, and coins—has been a form of currency for centuries. In order to swindle people
into paying for a brick of gold without actually investing in a brick of gold, people have considered filling
the centers of hollow gold bricks with lead to fool buyers into thinking that the entire brick is gold. It does
not work: Lead is a dense substance, but its density is not as great as that of gold, 19.3 g/cm3. What is the
density of lead if a cube of lead has an edge length of 2.00 cm and a mass of 90.7 g?

Solution
The density of a substance can be calculated by dividing its mass by its volume. The volume of a cube is
calculated by cubing the edge length.
volume of lead cube = 2.00 cm × 2.00 cm × 2.00 cm = 8.00 cm 3
90.7 g
11.3 g
density = mass =
=
= 11.3 g/cm 3
3
3
volume
8.00 cm
1.00 cm

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

35

(We will discuss the reason for rounding to the first decimal place in the next section.)

Check Your Learning
(a) To three decimal places, what is the volume of a cube (cm3) with an edge length of 0.843 cm?
(b) If the cube in part (a) is copper and has a mass of 5.34 g, what is the density of copper to two decimal
places?
Answer: (a) 0.599 cm3; (b) 8.91 g/cm3

Link to Learning
To learn more about the relationship between mass, volume, and density, use this
interactive simulator (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/16phetmasvolden) to
explore the density of different materials, like wood, ice, brick, and aluminum.

Example 1.2
Using Displacement of Water to Determine Density
This PhET simulation (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/16phetmasvolden) illustrates another way to
determine density, using displacement of water. Determine the density of the red and yellow blocks.

Solution
When you open the density simulation and select Same Mass, you can choose from several 5.00-kg colored
blocks that you can drop into a tank containing 100.00 L water. The yellow block floats (it is less dense than
water), and the water level rises to 105.00 L. While floating, the yellow block displaces 5.00 L water, an
amount equal to the weight of the block. The red block sinks (it is more dense than water, which has density
= 1.00 kg/L), and the water level rises to 101.25 L.
The red block therefore displaces 1.25 L water, an amount equal to the volume of the block. The density of
the red block is:
density =

mass = 5.00 kg = 4.00 kg/L
volume
1.25 L

Note that since the yellow block is not completely submerged, you cannot determine its density from this
information. But if you hold the yellow block on the bottom of the tank, the water level rises to 110.00 L,
which means that it now displaces 10.00 L water, and its density can be found:
density =

mass = 5.00 kg = 0.500 kg/L
10.00 L
volume

Check Your Learning
Remove all of the blocks from the water and add the green block to the tank of water, placing it
approximately in the middle of the tank. Determine the density of the green block.
Answer: 2.00 kg/L

36

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

1.5 Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and Precision
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define accuracy and precision
• Distinguish exact and uncertain numbers
• Correctly represent uncertainty in quantities using significant figures
• Apply proper rounding rules to computed quantities

Counting is the only type of measurement that is free from uncertainty, provided the number of objects being counted
does not change while the counting process is underway. The result of such a counting measurement is an example of
an exact number. If we count eggs in a carton, we know exactly how many eggs the carton contains. The numbers
of defined quantities are also exact. By definition, 1 foot is exactly 12 inches, 1 inch is exactly 2.54 centimeters, and
1 gram is exactly 0.001 kilogram. Quantities derived from measurements other than counting, however, are uncertain
to varying extents due to practical limitations of the measurement process used.

Significant Figures in Measurement
The numbers of measured quantities, unlike defined or directly counted quantities, are not exact. To measure the
volume of liquid in a graduated cylinder, you should make a reading at the bottom of the meniscus, the lowest point
on the curved surface of the liquid.

Figure 1.26 To measure the volume of liquid in this graduated cylinder, you must mentally subdivide the distance
between the 21 and 22 mL marks into tenths of a milliliter, and then make a reading (estimate) at the bottom of the
meniscus.

Refer to the illustration in Figure 1.26. The bottom of the meniscus in this case clearly lies between the 21 and 22
markings, meaning the liquid volume is certainly greater than 21 mL but less than 22 mL. The meniscus appears to
be a bit closer to the 22-mL mark than to the 21-mL mark, and so a reasonable estimate of the liquid’s volume would

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

37

be 21.6 mL. In the number 21.6, then, the digits 2 and 1 are certain, but the 6 is an estimate. Some people might
estimate the meniscus position to be equally distant from each of the markings and estimate the tenth-place digit as
5, while others may think it to be even closer to the 22-mL mark and estimate this digit to be 7. Note that it would
be pointless to attempt to estimate a digit for the hundredths place, given that the tenths-place digit is uncertain. In
general, numerical scales such as the one on this graduated cylinder will permit measurements to one-tenth of the
smallest scale division. The scale in this case has 1-mL divisions, and so volumes may be measured to the nearest 0.1
mL.
This concept holds true for all measurements, even if you do not actively make an estimate. If you place a quarter on a
standard electronic balance, you may obtain a reading of 6.72 g. The digits 6 and 7 are certain, and the 2 indicates that
the mass of the quarter is likely between 6.71 and 6.73 grams. The quarter weighs about 6.72 grams, with a nominal
uncertainty in the measurement of ± 0.01 gram. If we weigh the quarter on a more sensitive balance, we may find that
its mass is 6.723 g. This means its mass lies between 6.722 and 6.724 grams, an uncertainty of 0.001 gram. Every
measurement has some uncertainty, which depends on the device used (and the user’s ability). All of the digits in
a measurement, including the uncertain last digit, are called significant figures or significant digits. Note that zero
may be a measured value; for example, if you stand on a scale that shows weight to the nearest pound and it shows
“120,” then the 1 (hundreds), 2 (tens) and 0 (ones) are all significant (measured) values.
Whenever you make a measurement properly, all the digits in the result are significant. But what if you were analyzing
a reported value and trying to determine what is significant and what is not? Well, for starters, all nonzero digits are
significant, and it is only zeros that require some thought. We will use the terms “leading,” “trailing,” and “captive”
for the zeros and will consider how to deal with them.

Starting with the first nonzero digit on the left, count this digit and all remaining digits to the right. This is the number
of significant figures in the measurement unless the last digit is a trailing zero lying to the left of the decimal point.

Captive zeros result from measurement and are therefore always significant. Leading zeros, however, are never
significant—they merely tell us where the decimal point is located.

The leading zeros in this example are not significant. We could use exponential notation (as described in Appendix
B) and express the number as 8.32407 × 10−3; then the number 8.32407 contains all of the significant figures, and
10−3 locates the decimal point.
The number of significant figures is uncertain in a number that ends with a zero to the left of the decimal point
location. The zeros in the measurement 1,300 grams could be significant or they could simply indicate where the

38

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

decimal point is located. The ambiguity can be resolved with the use of exponential notation: 1.3 × 103 (two
significant figures), 1.30 × 103 (three significant figures, if the tens place was measured), or 1.300 × 103 (four
significant figures, if the ones place was also measured). In cases where only the decimal-formatted number is
available, it is prudent to assume that all trailing zeros are not significant.

When determining significant figures, be sure to pay attention to reported values and think about the measurement
and significant figures in terms of what is reasonable or likely when evaluating whether the value makes sense. For
example, the official January 2014 census reported the resident population of the US as 317,297,725. Do you think
the US population was correctly determined to the reported nine significant figures, that is, to the exact number of
people? People are constantly being born, dying, or moving into or out of the country, and assumptions are made to
account for the large number of people who are not actually counted. Because of these uncertainties, it might be more
reasonable to expect that we know the population to within perhaps a million or so, in which case the population
should be reported as 3.17 × 108 people.

Significant Figures in Calculations
A second important principle of uncertainty is that results calculated from a measurement are at least as uncertain as
the measurement itself. We must take the uncertainty in our measurements into account to avoid misrepresenting the
uncertainty in calculated results. One way to do this is to report the result of a calculation with the correct number of
significant figures, which is determined by the following three rules for rounding numbers:
1. When we add or subtract numbers, we should round the result to the same number of decimal places as the

number with the least number of decimal places (the least precise value in terms of addition and subtraction).
2. When we multiply or divide numbers, we should round the result to the same number of digits as the number

with the least number of significant figures (the least precise value in terms of multiplication and division).
3. If the digit to be dropped (the one immediately to the right of the digit to be retained) is less than 5, we “round

down” and leave the retained digit unchanged; if it is more than 5, we “round up” and increase the retained
digit by 1; if the dropped digit is 5, we round up or down, whichever yields an even value for the retained
digit. (The last part of this rule may strike you as a bit odd, but it’s based on reliable statistics and is aimed at
avoiding any bias when dropping the digit “5,” since it is equally close to both possible values of the retained
digit.)
The following examples illustrate the application of this rule in rounding a few different numbers to three significant
figures:
• 0.028675 rounds “up” to 0.0287 (the dropped digit, 7, is greater than 5)
• 18.3384 rounds “down” to 18.3 (the dropped digit, 3, is less than 5)
• 6.8752 rounds “up” to 6.88 (the dropped digit is 5, and the retained digit is even)
• 92.85 rounds “down” to 92.8 (the dropped digit is 5, and the retained digit is even)

Let’s work through these rules with a few examples.

Example 1.3
Rounding Numbers
Round the following to the indicated number of significant figures:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

39

(a) 31.57 (to two significant figures)
(b) 8.1649 (to three significant figures)
(c) 0.051065 (to four significant figures)
(d) 0.90275 (to four significant figures)

Solution
(a) 31.57 rounds “up” to 32 (the dropped digit is 5, and the retained digit is even)
(b) 8.1649 rounds “down” to 8.16 (the dropped digit, 4, is less than 5)
(c) 0.051065 rounds “down” to 0.05106 (the dropped digit is 5, and the retained digit is even)
(d) 0.90275 rounds “up” to 0.9028 (the dropped digit is 5, and the retained digit is even)

Check Your Learning
Round the following to the indicated number of significant figures:
(a) 0.424 (to two significant figures)
(b) 0.0038661 (to three significant figures)
(c) 421.25 (to four significant figures)
(d) 28,683.5 (to five significant figures)
Answer: (a) 0.42; (b) 0.00387; (c) 421.2; (d) 28,684

Example 1.4
Addition and Subtraction with Significant Figures
Rule: When we add or subtract numbers, we should round the result to the same number of decimal places
as the number with the least number of decimal places (i.e., the least precise value in terms of addition and
subtraction).
(a) Add 1.0023 g and 4.383 g.
(b) Subtract 421.23 g from 486 g.

Solution
(a)

1.0023 g
+ 4.383 g
5.3853 g

Answer is 5.385 g (round to the thousandths place; three decimal places)
(b)

486 g
−421.23 g
64.77 g

Answer is 65 g (round to the ones place; no decimal places)

40

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

Check Your Learning
(a) Add 2.334 mL and 0.31 mL.
(b) Subtract 55.8752 m from 56.533 m.
Answer: (a) 2.64 mL; (b) 0.658 m

Example 1.5
Multiplication and Division with Significant Figures
Rule: When we multiply or divide numbers, we should round the result to the same number of digits as the
number with the least number of significant figures (the least precise value in terms of multiplication and
division).
(a) Multiply 0.6238 cm by 6.6 cm.
(b) Divide 421.23 g by 486 mL.

Solution
(a)

0.6238 cm × 6.6 cm = 4.11708 cm 2 ⟶ result is 4.1 cm 2 (round to two significant fig es )
four significant fig es × two significant fig es ⟶ two significant fig es answer

421.23 g
= 0.86728... g/mL ⟶ result is 0.867 g/mL ⎛⎝round to three significant fig es ⎞⎠
486 mL
(b)
fi e significant fig es
⟶ three significant fig es answer
three significant fig es

Check Your Learning
(a) Multiply 2.334 cm and 0.320 cm.
(b) Divide 55.8752 m by 56.53 s.
Answer: (a) 0.747 cm2 (b) 0.9884 m/s

In the midst of all these technicalities, it is important to keep in mind the reason why we use significant figures and
rounding rules—to correctly represent the certainty of the values we report and to ensure that a calculated result is not
represented as being more certain than the least certain value used in the calculation.

Example 1.6
Calculation with Significant Figures
One common bathtub is 13.44 dm long, 5.920 dm wide, and 2.54 dm deep. Assume that the tub is
rectangular and calculate its approximate volume in liters.

Solution

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

41

V = l×w×d
= 13.44 dm × 5.920 dm × 2.54 dm
= 202.09459... dm 3 (value from calculator)

= 202 dm 3 , or 202 L ⎛⎝answer rounded to three significant fig es ⎞⎠

Check Your Learning
What is the density of a liquid with a mass of 31.1415 g and a volume of 30.13 cm3?
Answer: 1.034 g/mL

Example 1.7
Experimental Determination of Density Using Water Displacement
A piece of rebar is weighed and then submerged in a graduated cylinder partially filled with water, with
results as shown.

(a) Use these values to determine the density of this piece of rebar.
(b) Rebar is mostly iron. Does your result in (a) support this statement? How?

Solution
The volume of the piece of rebar is equal to the volume of the water displaced:
volume = 22.4 mL − 13.5 mL = 8.9 mL = 8.9 cm 3
(rounded to the nearest 0.1 mL, per the rule for addition and subtraction)
The density is the mass-to-volume ratio:
density =

mass = 69.658 g = 7.8 g/cm 3
volume
8.9 cm 3

(rounded to two significant figures, per the rule for multiplication and division)

42

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

From Table 1.4, the density of iron is 7.9 g/cm3, very close to that of rebar, which lends some support to
the fact that rebar is mostly iron.

Check Your Learning
An irregularly shaped piece of a shiny yellowish material is weighed and then submerged in a graduated
cylinder, with results as shown.

(a) Use these values to determine the density of this material.
(b) Do you have any reasonable guesses as to the identity of this material? Explain your reasoning.
Answer: (a) 19 g/cm3; (b) It is likely gold; the right appearance for gold and very close to the density given
for gold in Table 1.4.

Accuracy and Precision
Scientists typically make repeated measurements of a quantity to ensure the quality of their findings and to know
both the precision and the accuracy of their results. Measurements are said to be precise if they yield very similar
results when repeated in the same manner. A measurement is considered accurate if it yields a result that is very close
to the true or accepted value. Precise values agree with each other; accurate values agree with a true value. These
characterizations can be extended to other contexts, such as the results of an archery competition (Figure 1.27).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

43

Figure 1.27 (a) These arrows are close to both the bull’s eye and one another, so they are both accurate and
precise. (b) These arrows are close to one another but not on target, so they are precise but not accurate. (c) These
arrows are neither on target nor close to one another, so they are neither accurate nor precise.

Suppose a quality control chemist at a pharmaceutical company is tasked with checking the accuracy and precision
of three different machines that are meant to dispense 10 ounces (296 mL) of cough syrup into storage bottles. She
proceeds to use each machine to fill five bottles and then carefully determines the actual volume dispensed, obtaining
the results tabulated in Table 1.5.
Volume (mL) of Cough Medicine Delivered by 10-oz (296 mL) Dispensers
Dispenser #1

Dispenser #2

Dispenser #3

283.3

298.3

296.1

284.1

294.2

295.9

283.9

296.0

296.1

284.0

297.8

296.0

284.1

293.9

296.1

Table 1.5

Considering these results, she will report that dispenser #1 is precise (values all close to one another, within a few
tenths of a milliliter) but not accurate (none of the values are close to the target value of 296 mL, each being more
than 10 mL too low). Results for dispenser #2 represent improved accuracy (each volume is less than 3 mL away
from 296 mL) but worse precision (volumes vary by more than 4 mL). Finally, she can report that dispenser #3 is
working well, dispensing cough syrup both accurately (all volumes within 0.1 mL of the target volume) and precisely
(volumes differing from each other by no more than 0.2 mL).

1.6 Mathematical Treatment of Measurement Results
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the dimensional analysis (factor label) approach to mathematical calculations involving quantities
• Use dimensional analysis to carry out unit conversions for a given property and computations involving two

or more properties

44

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

It is often the case that a quantity of interest may not be easy (or even possible) to measure directly but instead
must be calculated from other directly measured properties and appropriate mathematical relationships. For example,
consider measuring the average speed of an athlete running sprints. This is typically accomplished by measuring the
time required for the athlete to run from the starting line to the finish line, and the distance between these two lines,
and then computing speed from the equation that relates these three properties:
speed = distance
time
An Olympic-quality sprinter can run 100 m in approximately 10 s, corresponding to an average speed of
100 m = 10 m/s
10 s
Note that this simple arithmetic involves dividing the numbers of each measured quantity to yield the number of
the computed quantity (100/10 = 10) and likewise dividing the units of each measured quantity to yield the unit of
the computed quantity (m/s = m/s). Now, consider using this same relation to predict the time required for a person
running at this speed to travel a distance of 25 m. The same relation between the three properties is used, but in this
case, the two quantities provided are a speed (10 m/s) and a distance (25 m). To yield the sought property, time, the
equation must be rearranged appropriately:
time = distance
speed
The time can then be computed as:
25 m = 2.5 s
10 m/s
Again, arithmetic on the numbers (25/10 = 2.5) was accompanied by the same arithmetic on the units (m/m/s = s) to
yield the number and unit of the result, 2.5 s. Note that, just as for numbers, when a unit is divided by an identical
unit (in this case, m/m), the result is “1”—or, as commonly phrased, the units “cancel.”
These calculations are examples of a versatile mathematical approach known as dimensional analysis (or the factorlabel method). Dimensional analysis is based on this premise: the units of quantities must be subjected to the same
mathematical operations as their associated numbers. This method can be applied to computations ranging from
simple unit conversions to more complex, multi-step calculations involving several different quantities.

Conversion Factors and Dimensional Analysis
A ratio of two equivalent quantities expressed with different measurement units can be used as a unit conversion
factor. For example, the lengths of 2.54 cm and 1 in. are equivalent (by definition), and so a unit conversion factor
may be derived from the ratio,
2.54 cm (2.54 cm = 1 in.) or 2.54 cm
in.
1 in.
Several other commonly used conversion factors are given in Table 1.6.
Common Conversion Factors
Length

Volume

Mass

1 m = 1.0936 yd

1 L = 1.0567 qt

1 kg = 2.2046 lb

1 in. = 2.54 cm (exact)

1 qt = 0.94635 L

1 lb = 453.59 g

1 km = 0.62137 mi

1 ft3 = 28.317 L

1 (avoirdupois) oz = 28.349 g

1 mi = 1609.3 m

1 tbsp = 14.787 mL

1 (troy) oz = 31.103 g

Table 1.6

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

45

When we multiply a quantity (such as distance given in inches) by an appropriate unit conversion factor, we convert
the quantity to an equivalent value with different units (such as distance in centimeters). For example, a basketball
player’s vertical jump of 34 inches can be converted to centimeters by:
34 in. × 2.54 cm = 86 cm
1 in.
Since this simple arithmetic involves quantities, the premise of dimensional analysis requires that we multiply both
numbers and units. The numbers of these two quantities are multiplied to yield the number of the product quantity, 86,
whereas the units are multiplied to yield in. × cm . Just as for numbers, a ratio of identical units is also numerically
in.
in.
equal to one,
= 1, and the unit product thus simplifies to cm. (When identical units divide to yield a factor of 1,
in.
they are said to “cancel.”) Using dimensional analysis, we can determine that a unit conversion factor has been set up
correctly by checking to confirm that the original unit will cancel, and the result will contain the sought (converted)
unit.

Example 1.8
Using a Unit Conversion Factor
The mass of a competition frisbee is 125 g. Convert its mass to ounces using the unit conversion factor
derived from the relationship 1 oz = 28.349 g (Table 1.6).

Solution
If we have the conversion factor, we can determine the mass in kilograms using an equation similar the one
used for converting length from inches to centimeters.
x oz = 125 g × unit conversion factor
We write the unit conversion factor in its two forms:
1 oz and 28.349 g
28.349 g
1 oz
The correct unit conversion factor is the ratio that cancels the units of grams and leaves ounces.
x oz = 125 g ×

1 oz
28.349 g

⎞
⎛
= ⎝ 125 ⎠ oz
28.349
= 4.41 oz (three significant fig es)

Check Your Learning
Convert a volume of 9.345 qt to liters.
Answer: 8.844 L

Beyond simple unit conversions, the factor-label method can be used to solve more complex problems involving
computations. Regardless of the details, the basic approach is the same—all the factors involved in the calculation
must be appropriately oriented to insure that their labels (units) will appropriately cancel and/or combine to yield the
desired unit in the result. This is why it is referred to as the factor-label method. As your study of chemistry continues,
you will encounter many opportunities to apply this approach.

46

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

Example 1.9
Computing Quantities from Measurement Results and Known
Mathematical Relations
What is the density of common antifreeze in units of g/mL? A 4.00-qt sample of the antifreeze weighs 9.26
lb.

Solution
mass , we need to divide the mass in grams by the volume in milliliters. In general: the
Since density = volume
number of units of B = the number of units of A × unit conversion factor. The necessary conversion factors
are given in Table 1.6: 1 lb = 453.59 g; 1 L = 1.0567 qt; 1 L = 1,000 mL. We can convert mass from pounds
to grams in one step:
9.26 lb ×

453.59 g
= 4.20 × 10 3 g
1 lb

We need to use two steps to convert volume from quarts to milliliters.
Step 1.

Convert quarts to liters.
4.00 qt ×

Step 2.

1L
= 3.78 L
1.0567 qt

Convert liters to milliliters.

3.78 L × 1000 mL = 3.78 × 10 3 mL
1L

Then,
density =

4.20 × 10 3 g
= 1.11 g/mL
3.78 × 10 3 mL

Alternatively, the calculation could be set up in a way that uses three unit conversion factors sequentially as
follows:
9.26 lb × 453.59 g × 1.0567 qt × 1 L
= 1.11 g/mL
1000 mL
4.00 qt
1L
1 lb

Check Your Learning
What is the volume in liters of 1.000 oz, given that 1 L = 1.0567 qt and 1 qt = 32 oz (exactly)?
Answer: 2.956 × 10 −2 L

Example 1.10
Computing Quantities from Measurement Results and Known
Mathematical Relations
While being driven from Philadelphia to Atlanta, a distance of about 1250 km, a 2014 Lamborghini
Aventador Roadster uses 213 L gasoline.
(a) What (average) fuel economy, in miles per gallon, did the Roadster get during this trip?
(b) If gasoline costs $3.80 per gallon, what was the fuel cost for this trip?

Solution
(a) We first convert distance from kilometers to miles:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

47

1250 km × 0.62137 mi = 777 mi
1 km
and then convert volume from liters to gallons:
213 L ×

1.0567 qt 1 gal
×
= 56.3 gal
4 qt
1L

Then,
(average) mileage = 777 mi = 13.8 miles/gallon = 13.8 mpg
56.3 gal
Alternatively, the calculation could be set up in a way that uses all the conversion factors sequentially, as
follows:
4 qt
1L
1250 km × 0.62137 mi ×
×
= 13.8 mpg
1.0567 qt 1 gal
213 L
1 km
(b) Using the previously calculated volume in gallons, we find:
56.3 gal × $3.80 = $214
1 gal

Check Your Learning
A Toyota Prius Hybrid uses 59.7 L gasoline to drive from San Francisco to Seattle, a distance of 1300 km
(two significant digits).
(a) What (average) fuel economy, in miles per gallon, did the Prius get during this trip?
(b) If gasoline costs $3.90 per gallon, what was the fuel cost for this trip?
Answer: (a) 51 mpg; (b) $62

Conversion of Temperature Units
We use the word temperature to refer to the hotness or coldness of a substance. One way we measure a change in
temperature is to use the fact that most substances expand when their temperature increases and contract when their
temperature decreases. The mercury or alcohol in a common glass thermometer changes its volume as the temperature
changes. Because the volume of the liquid changes more than the volume of the glass, we can see the liquid expand
when it gets warmer and contract when it gets cooler.
To mark a scale on a thermometer, we need a set of reference values: Two of the most commonly used are the
freezing and boiling temperatures of water at a specified atmospheric pressure. On the Celsius scale, 0 °C is defined
as the freezing temperature of water and 100 °C as the boiling temperature of water. The space between the two
temperatures is divided into 100 equal intervals, which we call degrees. On the Fahrenheit scale, the freezing point of
water is defined as 32 °F and the boiling temperature as 212 °F. The space between these two points on a Fahrenheit
thermometer is divided into 180 equal parts (degrees).
Defining the Celsius and Fahrenheit temperature scales as described in the previous paragraph results in a slightly
more complex relationship between temperature values on these two scales than for different units of measure for
other properties. Most measurement units for a given property are directly proportional to one another (y = mx). Using
familiar length units as one example:
⎞
⎛
length in feet = ⎝ 1 ft ⎠ × length in inches
12 in.

where y = length in feet, x = length in inches, and the proportionality constant, m, is the conversion factor. The Celsius
and Fahrenheit temperature scales, however, do not share a common zero point, and so the relationship between these
two scales is a linear one rather than a proportional one (y = mx + b). Consequently, converting a temperature from
one of these scales into the other requires more than simple multiplication by a conversion factor, m, it also must take

48

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

into account differences in the scales’ zero points (b).
The linear equation relating Celsius and Fahrenheit temperatures is easily derived from the two temperatures used
to define each scale. Representing the Celsius temperature as x and the Fahrenheit temperature as y, the slope, m, is
computed to be:
m=

Δy
= 212 °F − 32 °F = 180 °F = 9 °F
Δx
100 °C − 0 °C
100 °C
5 °C

The y-intercept of the equation, b, is then calculated using either of the equivalent temperature pairs, (100 °C, 212 °F)
or (0 °C, 32 °F), as:
b = y − mx = 32 °F − 9 °F × 0 °C = 32 °F
5 °C
The equation relating the temperature scales is then:
⎛

⎞

T °F = ⎝ 9 °F × T °C⎠ + 32 °C
5 °C
An abbreviated form of this equation that omits the measurement units is:
⎛
⎞
T °F = ⎝ 9 × T °C⎠ + 32
5

Rearrangement of this equation yields the form useful for converting from Fahrenheit to Celsius:
T °C = 5 ⎛⎝T °F − 32⎞⎠
9
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, the SI unit of temperature is the kelvin (K). Unlike the Celsius and Fahrenheit
scales, the kelvin scale is an absolute temperature scale in which 0 (zero) K corresponds to the lowest temperature
that can theoretically be achieved. The early 19th-century discovery of the relationship between a gas's volume and
temperature suggested that the volume of a gas would be zero at −273.15 °C. In 1848, British physicist William
Thompson, who later adopted the title of Lord Kelvin, proposed an absolute temperature scale based on this concept
(further treatment of this topic is provided in this text’s chapter on gases).
The freezing temperature of water on this scale is 273.15 K and its boiling temperature 373.15 K. Notice the
numerical difference in these two reference temperatures is 100, the same as for the Celsius scale, and so the linear
relation between these two temperature scales will exhibit a slope of 1 K . Following the same approach, the
°C
equations for converting between the kelvin and Celsius temperature scales are derived to be:
T K = T °C + 273.15
T °C = T K − 273.15
The 273.15 in these equations has been determined experimentally, so it is not exact. Figure 1.28 shows the
relationship among the three temperature scales. Recall that we do not use the degree sign with temperatures on the
kelvin scale.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

49

Figure 1.28 The Fahrenheit, Celsius, and kelvin temperature scales are compared.

Although the kelvin (absolute) temperature scale is the official SI temperature scale, Celsius is commonly used in
many scientific contexts and is the scale of choice for nonscience contexts in almost all areas of the world. Very
few countries (the U.S. and its territories, the Bahamas, Belize, Cayman Islands, and Palau) still use Fahrenheit for
weather, medicine, and cooking.

Example 1.11
Conversion from Celsius
Normal body temperature has been commonly accepted as 37.0 °C (although it varies depending on time
of day and method of measurement, as well as among individuals). What is this temperature on the kelvin
scale and on the Fahrenheit scale?

Solution
K = °C + 273.15 = 37.0 + 273.2 = 310.2 K
⎛
⎞
9
°F = °C + 32.0 = ⎝9 × 37.0⎠ + 32.0 = 66.6 + 32.0 = 98.6 °F
5
5

Check Your Learning
Convert 80.92 °C to K and °F.
Answer: 354.07 K, 177.7 °F

50

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

Example 1.12
Conversion from Fahrenheit
Baking a ready-made pizza calls for an oven temperature of 450 °F. If you are in Europe, and your oven
thermometer uses the Celsius scale, what is the setting? What is the kelvin temperature?

Solution
⎛
°C = 5 (°F − 32) = 5 (450 − 32) = 5 × 418 = 232 °C ⟶ set oven to 230 °C
es ⎞⎠
⎝two significant fig
9
9
9
⎛
K = °C + 273.15 = 230 + 273 = 503 K ⟶ 5.0 × 10 2 K
es ⎞⎠
⎝two significant fig

Check Your Learning
Convert 50 °F to °C and K.
Answer: 10 °C, 280 K

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

51

Key Terms
accuracy how closely a measurement aligns with a correct value
atom smallest particle of an element that can enter into a chemical combination
Celsius (°C) unit of temperature; water freezes at 0 °C and boils at 100 °C on this scale
chemical change change producing a different kind of matter from the original kind of matter
chemical property behavior that is related to the change of one kind of matter into another kind of matter
chemistry study of the composition, properties, and interactions of matter
compound pure substance that can be decomposed into two or more elements
cubic centimeter (cm3 or cc) volume of a cube with an edge length of exactly 1 cm
cubic meter (m3) SI unit of volume
density ratio of mass to volume for a substance or object
dimensional analysis (also, factor-label method) versatile mathematical approach that can be applied to
computations ranging from simple unit conversions to more complex, multi-step calculations involving several
different quantities
element substance that is composed of a single type of atom; a substance that cannot be decomposed by a chemical
change
exact number number derived by counting or by definition
extensive property property of a substance that depends on the amount of the substance
Fahrenheit unit of temperature; water freezes at 32 °F and boils at 212 °F on this scale
gas state in which matter has neither definite volume nor shape
heterogeneous mixture combination of substances with a composition that varies from point to point
homogeneous mixture (also, solution) combination of substances with a composition that is uniform throughout
hypothesis tentative explanation of observations that acts as a guide for gathering and checking information
intensive property property of a substance that is independent of the amount of the substance
kelvin (K) SI unit of temperature; 273.15 K = 0 ºC
kilogram (kg) standard SI unit of mass; 1 kg = approximately 2.2 pounds
law statement that summarizes a vast number of experimental observations, and describes or predicts some aspect
of the natural world
law of conservation of matter when matter converts from one type to another or changes form, there is no
detectable change in the total amount of matter present
length measure of one dimension of an object
liquid state of matter that has a definite volume but indefinite shape

52

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

liter (L) (also, cubic decimeter) unit of volume; 1 L = 1,000 cm3
macroscopic domain realm of everyday things that are large enough to sense directly by human sight and touch
mass fundamental property indicating amount of matter
matter anything that occupies space and has mass
meter (m) standard metric and SI unit of length; 1 m = approximately 1.094 yards
microscopic domain realm of things that are much too small to be sensed directly
milliliter (mL) 1/1,000 of a liter; equal to 1 cm3
mixture matter that can be separated into its components by physical means
molecule bonded collection of two or more atoms of the same or different elements
physical change change in the state or properties of matter that does not involve a change in its chemical
composition
physical property characteristic of matter that is not associated with any change in its chemical composition
plasma gaseous state of matter containing a large number of electrically charged atoms and/or molecules
precision how closely a measurement matches the same measurement when repeated
pure substance homogeneous substance that has a constant composition
rounding procedure used to ensure that calculated results properly reflect the uncertainty in the measurements used
in the calculation
scientific method path of discovery that leads from question and observation to law or hypothesis to theory,
combined with experimental verification of the hypothesis and any necessary modification of the theory
second (s) SI unit of time
SI units (International System of Units) standards fixed by international agreement in the International System of
Units (Le Système International d’Unités)
significant figures (also, significant digits) all of the measured digits in a determination, including the uncertain
last digit
solid state of matter that is rigid, has a definite shape, and has a fairly constant volume
symbolic domain specialized language used to represent components of the macroscopic and microscopic domains,
such as chemical symbols, chemical formulas, chemical equations, graphs, drawings, and calculations
theory well-substantiated, comprehensive, testable explanation of a particular aspect of nature
uncertainty estimate of amount by which measurement differs from true value
unit standard of comparison for measurements
unit conversion factor ratio of equivalent quantities expressed with different units; used to convert from one unit to
a different unit
volume amount of space occupied by an object

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

53

weight force that gravity exerts on an object

Key Equations
mass
volume

•

density =

•

⎛
⎞
T °C = ⎝5 × T °F⎠ − 32
9

•

⎛
⎞
T °F = ⎝9 × T °C⎠ + 32
5

•

T K = °C + 273.15

•

T °C = K − 273.15

Summary
1.1 Chemistry in Context
Chemistry deals with the composition, structure, and properties of matter, and the ways by which various forms of
matter may be interconverted. Thus, it occupies a central place in the study and practice of science and technology.
Chemists use the scientific method to perform experiments, pose hypotheses, and formulate laws and develop
theories, so that they can better understand the behavior of the natural world. To do so, they operate in the
macroscopic, microscopic, and symbolic domains. Chemists measure, analyze, purify, and synthesize a wide variety
of substances that are important to our lives.
1.2 Phases and Classification of Matter
Matter is anything that occupies space and has mass. The basic building block of matter is the atom, the smallest
unit of an element that can enter into combinations with atoms of the same or other elements. In many substances,
atoms are combined into molecules. On earth, matter commonly exists in three states: solids, of fixed shape and
volume; liquids, of variable shape but fixed volume; and gases, of variable shape and volume. Under high-temperature
conditions, matter also can exist as a plasma. Most matter is a mixture: It is composed of two or more types of
matter that can be present in varying amounts and can be separated by physical means. Heterogeneous mixtures vary
in composition from point to point; homogeneous mixtures have the same composition from point to point. Pure
substances consist of only one type of matter. A pure substance can be an element, which consists of only one type
of atom and cannot be broken down by a chemical change, or a compound, which consists of two or more types of
atoms.
1.3 Physical and Chemical Properties
All substances have distinct physical and chemical properties, and may undergo physical or chemical changes.
Physical properties, such as hardness and boiling point, and physical changes, such as melting or freezing, do not
involve a change in the composition of matter. Chemical properties, such flammability and acidity, and chemical
changes, such as rusting, involve production of matter that differs from that present beforehand.
Measurable properties fall into one of two categories. Extensive properties depend on the amount of matter present,
for example, the mass of gold. Intensive properties do not depend on the amount of matter present, for example, the
density of gold. Heat is an example of an extensive property, and temperature is an example of an intensive property.
1.4 Measurements
Measurements provide quantitative information that is critical in studying and practicing chemistry. Each
measurement has an amount, a unit for comparison, and an uncertainty. Measurements can be represented in either
decimal or scientific notation. Scientists primarily use the SI (International System) or metric systems. We use base
SI units such as meters, seconds, and kilograms, as well as derived units, such as liters (for volume) and g/cm3 (for
density). In many cases, we find it convenient to use unit prefixes that yield fractional and multiple units, such as
microseconds (10−6 seconds) and megahertz (106 hertz), respectively.

54

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

1.5 Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and Precision
Quantities can be exact or measured. Measured quantities have an associated uncertainty that is represented by the
number of significant figures in the measurement. The uncertainty of a calculated value depends on the uncertainties
in the values used in the calculation and is reflected in how the value is rounded. Measured values can be accurate
(close to the true value) and/or precise (showing little variation when measured repeatedly).
1.6 Mathematical Treatment of Measurement Results
Measurements are made using a variety of units. It is often useful or necessary to convert a measured quantity from
one unit into another. These conversions are accomplished using unit conversion factors, which are derived by simple
applications of a mathematical approach called the factor-label method or dimensional analysis. This strategy is also
employed to calculate sought quantities using measured quantities and appropriate mathematical relations.

Exercises
1.1 Chemistry in Context
1. Explain how you could experimentally determine whether the outside temperature is higher or lower than 0 °C
(32 °F) without using a thermometer.
2. Identify each of the following statements as being most similar to a hypothesis, a law, or a theory. Explain your
reasoning.
(a) Falling barometric pressure precedes the onset of bad weather.
(b) All life on earth has evolved from a common, primitive organism through the process of natural selection.
(c) My truck’s gas mileage has dropped significantly, probably because it’s due for a tune-up.
3. Identify each of the following statements as being most similar to a hypothesis, a law, or a theory. Explain your
reasoning.
(a) The pressure of a sample of gas is directly proportional to the temperature of the gas.
(b) Matter consists of tiny particles that can combine in specific ratios to form substances with specific properties.
(c) At a higher temperature, solids (such as salt or sugar) will dissolve better in water.
4. Identify each of the underlined items as a part of either the macroscopic domain, the microscopic domain, or the
symbolic domain of chemistry. For any in the symbolic domain, indicate whether they are symbols for a
macroscopic or a microscopic feature.
(a) The mass of a lead pipe is 14 lb.
(b) The mass of a certain chlorine atom is 35 amu.
(c) A bottle with a label that reads Al contains aluminum metal.
(d) Al is the symbol for an aluminum atom.
5. Identify each of the underlined items as a part of either the macroscopic domain, the microscopic domain, or the
symbolic domain of chemistry. For those in the symbolic domain, indicate whether they are symbols for a
macroscopic or a microscopic feature.
(a) A certain molecule contains one H atom and one Cl atom.
(b) Copper wire has a density of about 8 g/cm3.
(c) The bottle contains 15 grams of Ni powder.
(d) A sulfur molecule is composed of eight sulfur atoms.
6. According to one theory, the pressure of a gas increases as its volume decreases because the molecules in the gas
have to move a shorter distance to hit the walls of the container. Does this theory follow a macroscopic or
microscopic description of chemical behavior? Explain your answer.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

55

7. The amount of heat required to melt 2 lbs of ice is twice the amount of heat required to melt 1 lb of ice. Is this
observation a macroscopic or microscopic description of chemical behavior? Explain your answer.
1.2 Phases and Classification of Matter
8. Why do we use an object's mass, rather than its weight, to indicate the amount of matter it contains?
9. What properties distinguish solids from liquids? Liquids from gases? Solids from gases?
10. How does a heterogeneous mixture differ from a homogeneous mixture? How are they similar?
11. How does a homogeneous mixture differ from a pure substance? How are they similar?
12. How does an element differ from a compound? How are they similar?
13. How do molecules of elements and molecules of compounds differ? In what ways are they similar?
14. How does an atom differ from a molecule? In what ways are they similar?
15. Many of the items you purchase are mixtures of pure compounds. Select three of these commercial products
and prepare a list of the ingredients that are pure compounds.
16. Classify each of the following as an element, a compound, or a mixture:
(a) copper
(b) water
(c) nitrogen
(d) sulfur
(e) air
(f) sucrose
(g) a substance composed of molecules each of which contains two iodine atoms
(h) gasoline
17. Classify each of the following as an element, a compound, or a mixture:
(a) iron
(b) oxygen
(c) mercury oxide
(d) pancake syrup
(e) carbon dioxide
(f) a substance composed of molecules each of which contains one hydrogen atom and one chlorine atom
(g) baking soda
(h) baking powder
18. A sulfur atom and a sulfur molecule are not identical. What is the difference?
19. How are the molecules in oxygen gas, the molecules in hydrogen gas, and water molecules similar? How do
they differ?
20. We refer to astronauts in space as weightless, but not without mass. Why?
21. As we drive an automobile, we don't think about the chemicals consumed and produced. Prepare a list of the
principal chemicals consumed and produced during the operation of an automobile.
22. Matter is everywhere around us. Make a list by name of fifteen different kinds of matter that you encounter
every day. Your list should include (and label at least one example of each) the following: a solid, a liquid, a gas, an
element, a compound, a homogenous mixture, a heterogeneous mixture, and a pure substance.

56

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

23. When elemental iron corrodes it combines with oxygen in the air to ultimately form red brown iron(III) oxide
which we call rust. (a) If a shiny iron nail with an initial mass of 23.2 g is weighed after being coated in a layer of
rust, would you expect the mass to have increased, decreased, or remained the same? Explain. (b) If the mass of the
iron nail increases to 24.1 g, what mass of oxygen combined with the iron?
24. As stated in the text, convincing examples that demonstrate the law of conservation of matter outside of the
laboratory are few and far between. Indicate whether the mass would increase, decrease, or stay the same for the
following scenarios where chemical reactions take place:
(a) Exactly one pound of bread dough is placed in a baking tin. The dough is cooked in an oven at 350 °F releasing a
wonderful aroma of freshly baked bread during the cooking process. Is the mass of the baked loaf less than, greater
than, or the same as the one pound of original dough? Explain.
(b) When magnesium burns in air a white flaky ash of magnesium oxide is produced. Is the mass of magnesium
oxide less than, greater than, or the same as the original piece of magnesium? Explain.
(c) Antoine Lavoisier, the French scientist credited with first stating the law of conservation of matter, heated a
mixture of tin and air in a sealed flask to produce tin oxide. Did the mass of the sealed flask and contents decrease,
increase, or remain the same after the heating?
25. Yeast converts glucose to ethanol and carbon dioxide during anaerobic fermentation as depicted in the simple
chemical equation here:
glucose ⟶ ethanol + carbon dioxide
(a) If 200.0 g of glucose is fully converted, what will be the total mass of ethanol and carbon dioxide produced?
(b) If the fermentation is carried out in an open container, would you expect the mass of the container and contents
after fermentation to be less than, greater than, or the same as the mass of the container and contents before
fermentation? Explain.
(c) If 97.7 g of carbon dioxide is produced, what mass of ethanol is produced?
1.3 Physical and Chemical Properties
26. Classify the six underlined properties in the following paragraph as chemical or physical:
Fluorine is a pale yellow gas that reacts with most substances. The free element melts at −220 °C and boils at −188
°C. Finely divided metals burn in fluorine with a bright flame. Nineteen grams of fluorine will react with 1.0 gram
of hydrogen.
27. Classify each of the following changes as physical or chemical:
(a) condensation of steam
(b) burning of gasoline
(c) souring of milk
(d) dissolving of sugar in water
(e) melting of gold
28. Classify each of the following changes as physical or chemical:
(a) coal burning
(b) ice melting
(c) mixing chocolate syrup with milk
(d) explosion of a firecracker
(e) magnetizing of a screwdriver
29. The volume of a sample of oxygen gas changed from 10 mL to 11 mL as the temperature changed. Is this a
chemical or physical change?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

57

30. A 2.0-liter volume of hydrogen gas combined with 1.0 liter of oxygen gas to produce 2.0 liters of water vapor.
Does oxygen undergo a chemical or physical change?
31. Explain the difference between extensive properties and intensive properties.
32. Identify the following properties as either extensive or intensive.
(a) volume
(b) temperature
(c) humidity
(d) heat
(e) boiling point
33. The density (d) of a substance is an intensive property that is defined as the ratio of its mass (m) to its volume
mass
d= m
(V). density = volume
V
Considering that mass and volume are both extensive properties, explain why their ratio, density, is intensive.
1.4 Measurements
34. Is one liter about an ounce, a pint, a quart, or a gallon?
35. Is a meter about an inch, a foot, a yard, or a mile?
36. Indicate the SI base units or derived units that are appropriate for the following measurements:
(a) the length of a marathon race (26 miles 385 yards)
(b) the mass of an automobile
(c) the volume of a swimming pool
(d) the speed of an airplane
(e) the density of gold
(f) the area of a football field
(g) the maximum temperature at the South Pole on April 1, 1913
37. Indicate the SI base units or derived units that are appropriate for the following measurements:
(a) the mass of the moon
(b) the distance from Dallas to Oklahoma City
(c) the speed of sound
(d) the density of air
(e) the temperature at which alcohol boils
(f) the area of the state of Delaware
(g) the volume of a flu shot or a measles vaccination
38. Give the name and symbol of the prefixes used with SI units to indicate multiplication by the following exact
quantities.
(a) 103
(b) 10−2
(c) 0.1
(d) 10−3
(e) 1,000,000
(f) 0.000001

58

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

39. Give the name of the prefix and the quantity indicated by the following symbols that are used with SI base
units.
(a) c
(b) d
(c) G
(d) k
(e) m
(f) n
(g) p
(h) T
40. A large piece of jewelry has a mass of 132.6 g. A graduated cylinder initially contains 48.6 mL water. When
the jewelry is submerged in the graduated cylinder, the total volume increases to 61.2 mL.
(a) Determine the density of this piece of jewelry.
(b) Assuming that the jewelry is made from only one substance, what substance is it likely to be? Explain.
41. Visit this PhET density simulation (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/16phetmasvolden) and select the
Same Volume Blocks.
(a) What are the mass, volume, and density of the yellow block?
(b) What are the mass, volume and density of the red block?
(c) List the block colors in order from smallest to largest mass.
(d) List the block colors in order from lowest to highest density.
(e) How are mass and density related for blocks of the same volume?
42. Visit this PhET density simulation (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/16phetmasvolden) and select
Custom Blocks and then My Block.
(a) Enter mass and volume values for the block such that the mass in kg is less than the volume in L. What does the
block do? Why? Is this always the case when mass < volume?
(b) Enter mass and volume values for the block such that the mass in kg is more than the volume in L. What does
the block do? Why? Is this always the case when mass > volume?
(c) How would (a) and (b) be different if the liquid in the tank were ethanol instead of water?
(d) How would (a) and (b) be different if the liquid in the tank were mercury instead of water?
43. Visit this PhET density simulation (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/16phetmasvolden) and select
Mystery Blocks.
(a) Pick one of the Mystery Blocks and determine its mass, volume, density, and its likely identity.
(b) Pick a different Mystery Block and determine its mass, volume, density, and its likely identity.
(c) Order the Mystery Blocks from least dense to most dense. Explain.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

1.5 Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and Precision
44. Express each of the following numbers in scientific notation with correct significant figures:
(a) 711.0
(b) 0.239
(c) 90743
(d) 134.2
(e) 0.05499
(f) 10000.0
(g) 0.000000738592
45. Express each of the following numbers in exponential notation with correct significant figures:
(a) 704
(b) 0.03344
(c) 547.9
(d) 22086
(e) 1000.00
(f) 0.0000000651
(g) 0.007157
46. Indicate whether each of the following can be determined exactly or must be measured with some degree of
uncertainty:
(a) the number of eggs in a basket
(b) the mass of a dozen eggs
(c) the number of gallons of gasoline necessary to fill an automobile gas tank
(d) the number of cm in 2 m
(e) the mass of a textbook
(f) the time required to drive from San Francisco to Kansas City at an average speed of 53 mi/h
47. Indicate whether each of the following can be determined exactly or must be measured with some degree of
uncertainty:
(a) the number of seconds in an hour
(b) the number of pages in this book
(c) the number of grams in your weight
(d) the number of grams in 3 kilograms
(e) the volume of water you drink in one day
(f) the distance from San Francisco to Kansas City

59

60

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

48. How many significant figures are contained in each of the following measurements?
(a) 38.7 g
(b) 2 × 1018 m
(c) 3,486,002 kg
(d) 9.74150 × 10−4 J
(e) 0.0613 cm3
(f) 17.0 kg
(g) 0.01400 g/mL
49. How many significant figures are contained in each of the following measurements?
(a) 53 cm
(b) 2.05 × 108 m
(c) 86,002 J
(d) 9.740 × 104 m/s
(e) 10.0613 m3
(f) 0.17 g/mL
(g) 0.88400 s
50. The following quantities were reported on the labels of commercial products. Determine the number of
significant figures in each.
(a) 0.0055 g active ingredients
(b) 12 tablets
(c) 3% hydrogen peroxide
(d) 5.5 ounces
(e) 473 mL
(f) 1.75% bismuth
(g) 0.001% phosphoric acid
(h) 99.80% inert ingredients
51. Round off each of the following numbers to two significant figures:
(a) 0.436
(b) 9.000
(c) 27.2
(d) 135
(e) 1.497 × 10−3
(f) 0.445

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

52. Round off each of the following numbers to two significant figures:
(a) 517
(b) 86.3
(c) 6.382 × 103
(d) 5.0008
(e) 22.497
(f) 0.885
53. Perform the following calculations and report each answer with the correct number of significant figures.
(a) 628 × 342
(b) (5.63 × 102) × (7.4 × 103)
(c)

28.0
13.483

(d) 8119 × 0.000023
(e) 14.98 + 27,340 + 84.7593
(f) 42.7 + 0.259
54. Perform the following calculations and report each answer with the correct number of significant figures.
(a) 62.8 × 34
(b) 0.147 + 0.0066 + 0.012
(c) 38 × 95 × 1.792
(d) 15 – 0.15 – 0.6155
(e) 8.78 × ⎛⎝0.0500 ⎞⎠
0.478
(f) 140 + 7.68 + 0.014
(g) 28.7 – 0.0483
(h) (88.5 − 87.57)
45.13

61

62

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

55. Consider the results of the archery contest shown in this figure.
(a) Which archer is most precise?
(b) Which archer is most accurate?
(c) Who is both least precise and least accurate?

56. Classify the following sets of measurements as accurate, precise, both, or neither.
(a) Checking for consistency in the weight of chocolate chip cookies: 17.27 g, 13.05 g, 19.46 g, 16.92 g
(b) Testing the volume of a batch of 25-mL pipettes: 27.02 mL, 26.99 mL, 26.97 mL, 27.01 mL
(c) Determining the purity of gold: 99.9999%, 99.9998%, 99.9998%, 99.9999%
1.6 Mathematical Treatment of Measurement Results
57. Write conversion factors (as ratios) for the number of:
(a) yards in 1 meter
(b) liters in 1 liquid quart
(c) pounds in 1 kilogram
58. Write conversion factors (as ratios) for the number of:
(a) kilometers in 1 mile
(b) liters in 1 cubic foot
(c) grams in 1 ounce
59. The label on a soft drink bottle gives the volume in two units: 2.0 L and 67.6 fl oz. Use this information to
derive a conversion factor between the English and metric units. How many significant figures can you justify in
your conversion factor?
60. The label on a box of cereal gives the mass of cereal in two units: 978 grams and 34.5 oz. Use this information
to find a conversion factor between the English and metric units. How many significant figures can you justify in
your conversion factor?
61. Soccer is played with a round ball having a circumference between 27 and 28 in. and a weight between 14 and
16 oz. What are these specifications in units of centimeters and grams?
62. A woman's basketball has a circumference between 28.5 and 29.0 inches and a maximum weight of 20 ounces
(two significant figures). What are these specifications in units of centimeters and grams?
63. How many milliliters of a soft drink are contained in a 12.0-oz can?
64. A barrel of oil is exactly 42 gal. How many liters of oil are in a barrel?
65. The diameter of a red blood cell is about 3 × 10−4 in. What is its diameter in centimeters?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

63

66. The distance between the centers of the two oxygen atoms in an oxygen molecule is 1.21 × 10−8 cm. What is
this distance in inches?
67. Is a 197-lb weight lifter light enough to compete in a class limited to those weighing 90 kg or less?
68. A very good 197-lb weight lifter lifted 192 kg in a move called the clean and jerk. What was the mass of the
weight lifted in pounds?
69. Many medical laboratory tests are run using 5.0 μL blood serum. What is this volume in milliliters?
70. If an aspirin tablet contains 325 mg aspirin, how many grams of aspirin does it contain?
71. Use scientific (exponential) notation to express the following quantities in terms of the SI base units in Table
1.3:
(a) 0.13 g
(b) 232 Gg
(c) 5.23 pm
(d) 86.3 mg
(e) 37.6 cm
(f) 54 μm
(g) 1 Ts
(h) 27 ps
(i) 0.15 mK
72. Complete the following conversions between SI units.
(a) 612 g = ________ mg
(b) 8.160 m = ________ cm
(c) 3779 μg = ________ g
(d) 781 mL = ________ L
(e) 4.18 kg = ________ g
(f) 27.8 m = ________ km
(g) 0.13 mL = ________ L
(h) 1738 km = ________ m
(i) 1.9 Gg = ________ g
73.
74.
75.
76.

Gasoline is sold by the liter in many countries. How many liters are required to fill a 12.0-gal gas tank?
Milk is sold by the liter in many countries. What is the volume of exactly 1/2 gal of milk in liters?
A long ton is defined as exactly 2240 lb. What is this mass in kilograms?
Make the conversion indicated in each of the following:

(a) the men’s world record long jump, 29 ft 4¼ in., to meters
(b) the greatest depth of the ocean, about 6.5 mi, to kilometers
(c) the area of the state of Oregon, 96,981 mi2, to square kilometers
(d) the volume of 1 gill (exactly 4 oz) to milliliters
(e) the estimated volume of the oceans, 330,000,000 mi3, to cubic kilometers.
(f) the mass of a 3525-lb car to kilograms
(g) the mass of a 2.3-oz egg to grams

64

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

77. Make the conversion indicated in each of the following:
(a) the length of a soccer field, 120 m (three significant figures), to feet
(b) the height of Mt. Kilimanjaro, at 19,565 ft the highest mountain in Africa, to kilometers
(c) the area of an 8.5 × 11-inch sheet of paper in cm2
(d) the displacement volume of an automobile engine, 161 in.3, to liters
(e) the estimated mass of the atmosphere, 5.6 × 1015 tons, to kilograms
(f) the mass of a bushel of rye, 32.0 lb, to kilograms
(g) the mass of a 5.00-grain aspirin tablet to milligrams (1 grain = 0.00229 oz)
78. Many chemistry conferences have held a 50-Trillion Angstrom Run (two significant figures). How long is this
run in kilometers and in miles? (1 Å = 1 × 10−10 m)
79. A chemist’s 50-Trillion Angstrom Run (see Exercise 1.78) would be an archeologist’s 10,900 cubit run. How
long is one cubit in meters and in feet? (1 Å = 1 × 10−8 cm)
80. The gas tank of a certain luxury automobile holds 22.3 gallons according to the owner’s manual. If the density
of gasoline is 0.8206 g/mL, determine the mass in kilograms and pounds of the fuel in a full tank.
81. As an instructor is preparing for an experiment, he requires 225 g phosphoric acid. The only container readily
available is a 150-mL Erlenmeyer flask. Is it large enough to contain the acid, whose density is 1.83 g/mL?
82. To prepare for a laboratory period, a student lab assistant needs 125 g of a compound. A bottle containing 1/4
lb is available. Did the student have enough of the compound?
83. A chemistry student is 159 cm tall and weighs 45.8 kg. What is her height in inches and weight in pounds?
84. In a recent Grand Prix, the winner completed the race with an average speed of 229.8 km/h. What was his
speed in miles per hour, meters per second, and feet per second?
85. Solve these problems about lumber dimensions.
(a) To describe to a European how houses are constructed in the US, the dimensions of “two-by-four” lumber must
be converted into metric units. The thickness × width × length dimensions are 1.50 in. × 3.50 in. × 8.00 ft in
the US. What are the dimensions in cm × cm × m?
(b) This lumber can be used as vertical studs, which are typically placed 16.0 in. apart. What is that distance in
centimeters?
86. The mercury content of a stream was believed to be above the minimum considered safe—1 part per billion
(ppb) by weight. An analysis indicated that the concentration was 0.68 parts per billion. What quantity of mercury in
1 ng Hg
grams was present in 15.0 L of the water, the density of which is 0.998 g/ml? (1 ppb Hg =
)
1 g water
87. Calculate the density of aluminum if 27.6 cm3 has a mass of 74.6 g.
88. Osmium is one of the densest elements known. What is its density if 2.72 g has a volume of 0.121 cm3?
89. Calculate these masses.
(a) What is the mass of 6.00 cm3 of mercury, density = 13.5939 g/cm3?
(b) What is the mass of 25.0 mL octane, density = 0.702 g/cm3?
90. Calculate these masses.
(a) What is the mass of 4.00 cm3 of sodium, density = 0.97 g/cm3 ?
(b) What is the mass of 125 mL gaseous chlorine, density = 3.16 g/L?
91. Calculate these volumes.
(a) What is the volume of 25 g iodine, density = 4.93 g/cm3?
(b) What is the volume of 3.28 g gaseous hydrogen, density = 0.089 g/L?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

65

92. Calculate these volumes.
(a) What is the volume of 11.3 g graphite, density = 2.25 g/cm3?
(b) What is the volume of 39.657 g bromine, density = 2.928 g/cm3?
93. Convert the boiling temperature of gold, 2966 °C, into degrees Fahrenheit and kelvin.
94. Convert the temperature of scalding water, 54 °C, into degrees Fahrenheit and kelvin.
95. Convert the temperature of the coldest area in a freezer, −10 °F, to degrees Celsius and kelvin.
96. Convert the temperature of dry ice, −77 °C, into degrees Fahrenheit and kelvin.
97. Convert the boiling temperature of liquid ammonia, −28.1 °F, into degrees Celsius and kelvin.
98. The label on a pressurized can of spray disinfectant warns against heating the can above 130 °F. What are the
corresponding temperatures on the Celsius and kelvin temperature scales?
99. The weather in Europe was unusually warm during the summer of 1995. The TV news reported temperatures as
high as 45 °C. What was the temperature on the Fahrenheit scale?

66

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 1 | Essential Ideas

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

67

Chapter 2

Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

Figure 2.1 Analysis of molecules in an exhaled breath can provide valuable information, leading to early diagnosis
of diseases or detection of environmental exposure to harmful substances. (credit: modification of work by Paul
Flowers)

Chapter Outline
2.1 Early Ideas in Atomic Theory
2.2 Evolution of Atomic Theory
2.3 Atomic Structure and Symbolism
2.4 Chemical Formulas
2.5 The Periodic Table
2.6 Molecular and Ionic Compounds
2.7 Chemical Nomenclature

Introduction
Your overall health and susceptibility to disease depends upon the complex interaction between your genetic makeup
and environmental exposure, with the outcome difficult to predict. Early detection of biomarkers, substances that
indicate an organism’s disease or physiological state, could allow diagnosis and treatment before a condition becomes
serious or irreversible. Recent studies have shown that your exhaled breath can contain molecules that may be
biomarkers for recent exposure to environmental contaminants or for pathological conditions ranging from asthma
to lung cancer. Scientists are working to develop biomarker “fingerprints” that could be used to diagnose a specific
disease based on the amounts and identities of certain molecules in a patient’s exhaled breath. An essential concept
underlying this goal is that of a molecule’s identity, which is determined by the numbers and types of atoms it
contains, and how they are bonded together. This chapter will describe some of the fundamental chemical principles
related to the composition of matter, including those central to the concept of molecular identity.

68

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

2.1 Early Ideas in Atomic Theory
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State the postulates of Dalton’s atomic theory
• Use postulates of Dalton’s atomic theory to explain the laws of definite and multiple proportions

The language used in chemistry is seen and heard in many disciplines, ranging from medicine to engineering to
forensics to art. The language of chemistry includes its own vocabulary as well as its own form of shorthand.
Chemical symbols are used to represent atoms and elements. Chemical formulas depict molecules as well as the
composition of compounds. Chemical equations provide information about the quality and quantity of the changes
associated with chemical reactions.
This chapter will lay the foundation for our study of the language of chemistry. The concepts of this foundation
include the atomic theory, the composition and mass of an atom, the variability of the composition of isotopes, ion
formation, chemical bonds in ionic and covalent compounds, the types of chemical reactions, and the naming of
compounds. We will also introduce one of the most powerful tools for organizing chemical knowledge: the periodic
table.

Atomic Theory through the Nineteenth Century
The earliest recorded discussion of the basic structure of matter comes from ancient Greek philosophers, the scientists
of their day. In the fifth century BC, Leucippus and Democritus argued that all matter was composed of small, finite
particles that they called atomos, a term derived from the Greek word for “indivisible.” They thought of atoms as
moving particles that differed in shape and size, and which could join together. Later, Aristotle and others came to
the conclusion that matter consisted of various combinations of the four “elements”—fire, earth, air, and water—and
could be infinitely divided. Interestingly, these philosophers thought about atoms and “elements” as philosophical
concepts, but apparently never considered performing experiments to test their ideas.
The Aristotelian view of the composition of matter held sway for over two thousand years, until English schoolteacher
John Dalton helped to revolutionize chemistry with his hypothesis that the behavior of matter could be explained
using an atomic theory. First published in 1807, many of Dalton’s hypotheses about the microscopic features of matter
are still valid in modern atomic theory. Here are the postulates of Dalton’s atomic theory.
1. Matter is composed of exceedingly small particles called atoms. An atom is the smallest unit of an element

that can participate in a chemical change.
2. An element consists of only one type of atom, which has a mass that is characteristic of the element and is the

same for all atoms of that element (Figure 2.2). A macroscopic sample of an element contains an incredibly
large number of atoms, all of which have identical chemical properties.

Figure 2.2 A pre-1982 copper penny (left) contains approximately 3 × 1022 copper atoms (several dozen
are represented as brown spheres at the right), each of which has the same chemical properties. (credit:
modification of work by “slgckgc”/Flickr)

3. Atoms of one element differ in properties from atoms of all other elements.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

69

4. A compound consists of atoms of two or more elements combined in a small, whole-number ratio. In a given

compound, the numbers of atoms of each of its elements are always present in the same ratio (Figure 2.3).

Figure 2.3 Copper(II) oxide, a powdery, black compound, results from the combination of two types of
atoms—copper (brown spheres) and oxygen (red spheres)—in a 1:1 ratio. (credit: modification of work by
“Chemicalinterest”/Wikimedia Commons)

5. Atoms are neither created nor destroyed during a chemical change, but are instead rearranged to yield

substances that are different from those present before the change (Figure 2.4).

Figure 2.4 When the elements copper (a shiny, red-brown solid, shown here as brown spheres) and oxygen
(a clear and colorless gas, shown here as red spheres) react, their atoms rearrange to form a compound
containing copper and oxygen (a powdery, black solid). (credit copper: modification of work by http://imagesof-elements.com/copper.php)

Dalton’s atomic theory provides a microscopic explanation of the many macroscopic properties of matter that you’ve
learned about. For example, if an element such as copper consists of only one kind of atom, then it cannot be broken
down into simpler substances, that is, into substances composed of fewer types of atoms. And if atoms are neither
created nor destroyed during a chemical change, then the total mass of matter present when matter changes from one
type to another will remain constant (the law of conservation of matter).

70

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

Example 2.1
Testing Dalton’s Atomic Theory
In the following drawing, the green spheres represent atoms of a certain element. The purple spheres
represent atoms of another element. If the spheres touch, they are part of a single unit of a compound. Does
the following chemical change represented by these symbols violate any of the ideas of Dalton’s atomic
theory? If so, which one?

Solution
The starting materials consist of two green spheres and two purple spheres. The products consist of only
one green sphere and one purple sphere. This violates Dalton’s postulate that atoms are neither created nor
destroyed during a chemical change, but are merely redistributed. (In this case, atoms appear to have been
destroyed.)

Check Your Learning
In the following drawing, the green spheres represent atoms of a certain element. The purple spheres
represent atoms of another element. If the spheres touch, they are part of a single unit of a compound. Does
the following chemical change represented by these symbols violate any of the ideas of Dalton’s atomic
theory? If so, which one?

Answer: The starting materials consist of four green spheres and two purple spheres. The products consist
of four green spheres and two purple spheres. This does not violate any of Dalton’s postulates: Atoms are
neither created nor destroyed, but are redistributed in small, whole-number ratios.

Dalton knew of the experiments of French chemist Joseph Proust, who demonstrated that all samples of a pure
compound contain the same elements in the same proportion by mass. This statement is known as the law of definite
proportions or the law of constant composition. The suggestion that the numbers of atoms of the elements in a given
compound always exist in the same ratio is consistent with these observations. For example, when different samples
of isooctane (a component of gasoline and one of the standards used in the octane rating system) are analyzed, they
are found to have a carbon-to-hydrogen mass ratio of 5.33:1, as shown in Table 2.1.
Constant Composition of Isooctane
Sample

Carbon

Hydrogen

Mass Ratio

A

14.82 g

2.78 g

14.82 g carbon
5.33 g carbon
=
2.78 g hydrogen
1.00 g hydrogen

B

22.33 g

4.19 g

22.33 g carbon
5.33 g carbon
=
4.19 g hydrogen
1.00 g hydrogen

C

19.40 g

3.64 g

5.33 g carbon
19.40 g carbon
=
1.00 g hydrogen
3.63 g hydrogen

Table 2.1

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

71

It is worth noting that although all samples of a particular compound have the same mass ratio, the converse is not
true in general. That is, samples that have the same mass ratio are not necessarily the same substance. For example,
there are many compounds other than isooctane that also have a carbon-to-hydrogen mass ratio of 5.33:1.00.
Dalton also used data from Proust, as well as results from his own experiments, to formulate another interesting law.
The law of multiple proportions states that when two elements react to form more than one compound, a fixed mass
of one element will react with masses of the other element in a ratio of small, whole numbers. For example, copper
and chlorine can form a green, crystalline solid with a mass ratio of 0.558 g chlorine to 1 g copper, as well as a
brown crystalline solid with a mass ratio of 1.116 g chlorine to 1 g copper. These ratios by themselves may not seem
particularly interesting or informative; however, if we take a ratio of these ratios, we obtain a useful and possibly
surprising result: a small, whole-number ratio.
1.116 g Cl
1 g Cu
0.558 g Cl
1 g Cu

= 2
1

This 2-to-1 ratio means that the brown compound has twice the amount of chlorine per amount of copper as the green
compound.
This can be explained by atomic theory if the copper-to-chlorine ratio in the brown compound is 1 copper atom to 2
chlorine atoms, and the ratio in the green compound is 1 copper atom to 1 chlorine atom. The ratio of chlorine atoms
(and thus the ratio of their masses) is therefore 2 to 1 (Figure 2.5).

Figure 2.5 Compared to the copper chlorine compound in (a), where copper is represented by brown spheres and
chlorine by green spheres, the copper chlorine compound in (b) has twice as many chlorine atoms per copper atom.
(credit a: modification of work by “Benjah-bmm27”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modification of work by
“Walkerma”/Wikimedia Commons)

Example 2.2
Laws of Definite and Multiple Proportions
A sample of compound A (a clear, colorless gas) is analyzed and found to contain 4.27 g carbon and 5.69
g oxygen. A sample of compound B (also a clear, colorless gas) is analyzed and found to contain 5.19 g
carbon and 13.84 g oxygen. Are these data an example of the law of definite proportions, the law of multiple
proportions, or neither? What do these data tell you about substances A and B?

Solution
In compound A, the mass ratio of carbon to oxygen is:

72

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

1.33 g O
1gC
In compound B, the mass ratio of carbon to oxygen is:
2.67 g O
1gC
The ratio of these ratios is:
1.33 g O
1gC
2.67 g O
1gC

= 1
2

This supports the law of multiple proportions. This means that A and B are different compounds, with A
having one-half as much oxygen per amount of carbon (or twice as much carbon per amount of oxygen) as
B. A possible pair of compounds that would fit this relationship would be A = CO and B = CO2.

Check Your Learning
A sample of compound X (a clear, colorless, combustible liquid with a noticeable odor) is analyzed and
found to contain 14.13 g carbon and 2.96 g hydrogen. A sample of compound Y (a clear, colorless,
combustible liquid with a noticeable odor that is slightly different from X’s odor) is analyzed and found to
contain 19.91 g carbon and 3.34 g hydrogen. Are these data an example of the law of definite proportions,
the law of multiple proportions, or neither? What do these data tell you about substances X and Y?
14.13 g C
. In compound Y, the mass
2.96 g H
19.91 g C
ratio of carbon to oxygen is
. The ratio of these ratios is
3.34 g H

Answer: In compound X, the mass ratio of carbon to hydrogen is

14.13 g C
2.96 g H
19.91 g C
3.34 g H

=

4.77 g C/g H
= 0.800 = 4 . This small, whole-number ratio supports the law of multiple
5.96 g C/g H
5
proportions. This means that X and Y are different compounds.

2.2 Evolution of Atomic Theory
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Outline milestones in the development of modern atomic theory
• Summarize and interpret the results of the experiments of Thomson, Millikan, and Rutherford
• Describe the three subatomic particles that compose atoms
• Define isotopes and give examples for several elements

In the two centuries since Dalton developed his ideas, scientists have made significant progress in furthering our
understanding of atomic theory. Much of this came from the results of several seminal experiments that revealed the
details of the internal structure of atoms. Here, we will discuss some of those key developments, with an emphasis
on application of the scientific method, as well as understanding how the experimental evidence was analyzed. While
the historical persons and dates behind these experiments can be quite interesting, it is most important to understand
the concepts resulting from their work.

Atomic Theory after the Nineteenth Century
If matter were composed of atoms, what were atoms composed of? Were they the smallest particles, or was there

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

73

something smaller? In the late 1800s, a number of scientists interested in questions like these investigated the
electrical discharges that could be produced in low-pressure gases, with the most significant discovery made by
English physicist J. J. Thomson using a cathode ray tube. This apparatus consisted of a sealed glass tube from which
almost all the air had been removed; the tube contained two metal electrodes. When high voltage was applied across
the electrodes, a visible beam called a cathode ray appeared between them. This beam was deflected toward the
positive charge and away from the negative charge, and was produced in the same way with identical properties
when different metals were used for the electrodes. In similar experiments, the ray was simultaneously deflected
by an applied magnetic field, and measurements of the extent of deflection and the magnetic field strength allowed
Thomson to calculate the charge-to-mass ratio of the cathode ray particles. The results of these measurements
indicated that these particles were much lighter than atoms (Figure 2.6).

Figure 2.6 (a) J. J. Thomson produced a visible beam in a cathode ray tube. (b) This is an early cathode ray tube,
invented in 1897 by Ferdinand Braun. (c) In the cathode ray, the beam (shown in yellow) comes from the cathode and
is accelerated past the anode toward a fluorescent scale at the end of the tube. Simultaneous deflections by applied
electric and magnetic fields permitted Thomson to calculate the mass-to-charge ratio of the particles composing the
cathode ray. (credit a: modification of work by Nobel Foundation; credit b: modification of work by Eugen Nesper;
credit c: modification of work by “Kurzon”/Wikimedia Commons)

Based on his observations, here is what Thomson proposed and why: The particles are attracted by positive (+)
charges and repelled by negative (−) charges, so they must be negatively charged (like charges repel and unlike
charges attract); they are less massive than atoms and indistinguishable, regardless of the source material, so they
must be fundamental, subatomic constituents of all atoms. Although controversial at the time, Thomson’s idea was
gradually accepted, and his cathode ray particle is what we now call an electron, a negatively charged, subatomic
particle with a mass more than one thousand-times less that of an atom. The term “electron” was coined in 1891 by
Irish physicist George Stoney, from “electric ion.”

74

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

Link to Learning
Click here (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/16JJThomson) to hear Thomson
describe his discovery in his own voice.

In 1909, more information about the electron was uncovered by American physicist Robert A. Millikan via his “oil
drop” experiments. Millikan created microscopic oil droplets, which could be electrically charged by friction as they
formed or by using X-rays. These droplets initially fell due to gravity, but their downward progress could be slowed
or even reversed by an electric field lower in the apparatus. By adjusting the electric field strength and making careful
measurements and appropriate calculations, Millikan was able to determine the charge on individual drops (Figure
2.7).

Figure 2.7 Millikan’s experiment measured the charge of individual oil drops. The tabulated data are examples of a
few possible values.

Looking at the charge data that Millikan gathered, you may have recognized that the charge of an oil droplet is always
a multiple of a specific charge, 1.6 × 10−19 C. Millikan concluded that this value must therefore be a fundamental
charge—the charge of a single electron—with his measured charges due to an excess of one electron (1 times 1.6 ×
10−19 C), two electrons (2 times 1.6 × 10−19 C), three electrons (3 times 1.6 × 10−19 C), and so on, on a given oil
droplet. Since the charge of an electron was now known due to Millikan’s research, and the charge-to-mass ratio was
already known due to Thomson’s research (1.759 × 1011 C/kg), it only required a simple calculation to determine
the mass of the electron as well.
Mass of electron = 1.602 × 10 −19 C ×

1 kg
= 9.107 × 10 −31 kg
1.759 × 10 11 C

Scientists had now established that the atom was not indivisible as Dalton had believed, and due to the work of
Thomson, Millikan, and others, the charge and mass of the negative, subatomic particles—the electrons—were

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

75

known. However, the positively charged part of an atom was not yet well understood. In 1904, Thomson proposed
the “plum pudding” model of atoms, which described a positively charged mass with an equal amount of negative
charge in the form of electrons embedded in it, since all atoms are electrically neutral. A competing model had been
proposed in 1903 by Hantaro Nagaoka, who postulated a Saturn-like atom, consisting of a positively charged sphere
surrounded by a halo of electrons (Figure 2.8).

Figure 2.8 (a) Thomson suggested that atoms resembled plum pudding, an English dessert consisting of moist cake
with embedded raisins (“plums”). (b) Nagaoka proposed that atoms resembled the planet Saturn, with a ring of
electrons surrounding a positive “planet.” (credit a: modification of work by “Man vyi”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b:
modification of work by “NASA”/Wikimedia Commons)

The next major development in understanding the atom came from Ernest Rutherford, a physicist from New Zealand
who largely spent his scientific career in Canada and England. He performed a series of experiments using a beam of
high-speed, positively charged alpha particles (α particles) that were produced by the radioactive decay of radium;
α particles consist of two protons and two neutrons (you will learn more about radioactive decay in the chapter
on nuclear chemistry). Rutherford and his colleagues Hans Geiger (later famous for the Geiger counter) and Ernest
Marsden aimed a beam of α particles, the source of which was embedded in a lead block to absorb most of the
radiation, at a very thin piece of gold foil and examined the resultant scattering of the α particles using a luminescent
screen that glowed briefly where hit by an α particle.
What did they discover? Most particles passed right through the foil without being deflected at all. However, some
were diverted slightly, and a very small number were deflected almost straight back toward the source (Figure 2.9).
Rutherford described finding these results: “It was quite the most incredible event that has ever happened to me in
my life. It was almost as incredible as if you fired a 15-inch shell at a piece of tissue paper and it came back and hit
you”[1] (p. 68).

1. Ernest Rutherford, “The Development of the Theory of Atomic Structure,” ed. J. A. Ratcliffe, in Background to Modern Science, eds.
Joseph Needham and Walter Pagel, (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1938), 61–74. Accessed September 22, 2014,
https://ia600508.us.archive.org/3/items/backgroundtomode032734mbp/backgroundtomode032734mbp.pdf.

76

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

Figure 2.9 Geiger and Rutherford fired α particles at a piece of gold foil and detected where those particles went, as
shown in this schematic diagram of their experiment. Most of the particles passed straight through the foil, but a few
were deflected slightly and a very small number were significantly deflected.

Here is what Rutherford deduced: Because most of the fast-moving α particles passed through the gold atoms
undeflected, they must have traveled through essentially empty space inside the atom. Alpha particles are positively
charged, so deflections arose when they encountered another positive charge (like charges repel each other). Since
like charges repel one another, the few positively charged α particles that changed paths abruptly must have hit, or
closely approached, another body that also had a highly concentrated, positive charge. Since the deflections occurred
a small fraction of the time, this charge only occupied a small amount of the space in the gold foil. Analyzing a series
of such experiments in detail, Rutherford drew two conclusions:
1. The volume occupied by an atom must consist of a large amount of empty space.
2. A small, relatively heavy, positively charged body, the nucleus, must be at the center of each atom.

Link to Learning
View this simulation (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/16Rutherford) of the
Rutherford gold foil experiment. Adjust the slit width to produce a narrower or
broader beam of α particles to see how that affects the scattering pattern.

This analysis led Rutherford to propose a model in which an atom consists of a very small, positively charged nucleus,
in which most of the mass of the atom is concentrated, surrounded by the negatively charged electrons, so that the
atom is electrically neutral (Figure 2.10). After many more experiments, Rutherford also discovered that the nuclei
of other elements contain the hydrogen nucleus as a “building block,” and he named this more fundamental particle
the proton, the positively charged, subatomic particle found in the nucleus. With one addition, which you will learn
next, this nuclear model of the atom, proposed over a century ago, is still used today.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

77

Figure 2.10 The α particles are deflected only when they collide with or pass close to the much heavier, positively
charged gold nucleus. Because the nucleus is very small compared to the size of an atom, very few α particles are
deflected. Most pass through the relatively large region occupied by electrons, which are too light to deflect the
rapidly moving particles.

Link to Learning
The Rutherford Scattering simulation (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/
16PhetScatter) allows you to investigate the differences between a “plum pudding”
atom and a Rutherford atom by firing α particles at each type of atom.

Another important finding was the discovery of isotopes. During the early 1900s, scientists identified several
substances that appeared to be new elements, isolating them from radioactive ores. For example, a “new element”
produced by the radioactive decay of thorium was initially given the name mesothorium. However, a more detailed
analysis showed that mesothorium was chemically identical to radium (another decay product), despite having a
different atomic mass. This result, along with similar findings for other elements, led the English chemist Frederick
Soddy to realize that an element could have types of atoms with different masses that were chemically
indistinguishable. These different types are called isotopes—atoms of the same element that differ in mass. Soddy
was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1921 for this discovery.
One puzzle remained: The nucleus was known to contain almost all of the mass of an atom, with the number of
protons only providing half, or less, of that mass. Different proposals were made to explain what constituted the
remaining mass, including the existence of neutral particles in the nucleus. As you might expect, detecting uncharged
particles is very challenging, and it was not until 1932 that James Chadwick found evidence of neutrons, uncharged,
subatomic particles with a mass approximately the same as that of protons. The existence of the neutron also
explained isotopes: They differ in mass because they have different numbers of neutrons, but they are chemically

78

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

identical because they have the same number of protons. This will be explained in more detail later in this chapter.

2.3 Atomic Structure and Symbolism
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Write and interpret symbols that depict the atomic number, mass number, and charge of an atom or ion
• Define the atomic mass unit and average atomic mass
• Calculate average atomic mass and isotopic abundance

The development of modern atomic theory revealed much about the inner structure of atoms. It was learned that an
atom contains a very small nucleus composed of positively charged protons and uncharged neutrons, surrounded by a
much larger volume of space containing negatively charged electrons. The nucleus contains the majority of an atom’s
mass because protons and neutrons are much heavier than electrons, whereas electrons occupy almost all of an atom’s
volume. The diameter of an atom is on the order of 10−10 m, whereas the diameter of the nucleus is roughly 10−15
m—about 100,000 times smaller. For a perspective about their relative sizes, consider this: If the nucleus were the
size of a blueberry, the atom would be about the size of a football stadium (Figure 2.11).

Figure 2.11 If an atom could be expanded to the size of a football stadium, the nucleus would be the size of a single
blueberry. (credit middle: modification of work by “babyknight”/Wikimedia Commons; credit right: modification of work
by Paxson Woelber)

Atoms—and the protons, neutrons, and electrons that compose them—are extremely small. For example, a carbon
atom weighs less than 2 × 10−23 g, and an electron has a charge of less than 2 × 10−19 C (coulomb). When
describing the properties of tiny objects such as atoms, we use appropriately small units of measure, such as the
atomic mass unit (amu) and the fundamental unit of charge (e). The amu was originally defined based on
hydrogen, the lightest element, then later in terms of oxygen. Since 1961, it has been defined with regard to the
most abundant isotope of carbon, atoms of which are assigned masses of exactly 12 amu. (This isotope is known as
“carbon-12” as will be discussed later in this module.) Thus, one amu is exactly 1 of the mass of one carbon-12
12
atom: 1 amu = 1.6605 × 10−24 g. (The Dalton (Da) and the unified atomic mass unit (u) are alternative units that
are equivalent to the amu.) The fundamental unit of charge (also called the elementary charge) equals the magnitude
of the charge of an electron (e) with e = 1.602 × 10−19 C.
A proton has a mass of 1.0073 amu and a charge of 1+. A neutron is a slightly heavier particle with a mass 1.0087
amu and a charge of zero; as its name suggests, it is neutral. The electron has a charge of 1− and is a much lighter
particle with a mass of about 0.00055 amu (it would take about 1800 electrons to equal the mass of one proton).
The properties of these fundamental particles are summarized in Table 2.2. (An observant student might notice that
the sum of an atom’s subatomic particles does not equal the atom’s actual mass: The total mass of six protons, six

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

79

neutrons, and six electrons is 12.0993 amu, slightly larger than 12.00 amu. This “missing” mass is known as the mass
defect, and you will learn about it in the chapter on nuclear chemistry.)
Properties of Subatomic Particles
Name

Location

Charge (C)

Unit Charge

Mass (amu)

Mass (g)

electron

outside nucleus

−1.602 × 10−19

1−

0.00055

0.00091 × 10−24

proton

nucleus

1.602 × 10−19

1+

1.00727

1.67262 × 10−24

neutron

nucleus

0

0

1.00866

1.67493 × 10−24

Table 2.2

The number of protons in the nucleus of an atom is its atomic number (Z). This is the defining trait of an element: Its
value determines the identity of the atom. For example, any atom that contains six protons is the element carbon and
has the atomic number 6, regardless of how many neutrons or electrons it may have. A neutral atom must contain the
same number of positive and negative charges, so the number of protons equals the number of electrons. Therefore,
the atomic number also indicates the number of electrons in an atom. The total number of protons and neutrons in an
atom is called its mass number (A). The number of neutrons is therefore the difference between the mass number
and the atomic number: A – Z = number of neutrons.
atomic number (Z) = number of protons
mass number (A) = number of protons + number of neutrons
A − Z = number of neutrons
Atoms are electrically neutral if they contain the same number of positively charged protons and negatively charged
electrons. When the numbers of these subatomic particles are not equal, the atom is electrically charged and is called
an ion. The charge of an atom is defined as follows:
Atomic charge = number of protons − number of electrons
As will be discussed in more detail later in this chapter, atoms (and molecules) typically acquire charge by gaining
or losing electrons. An atom that gains one or more electrons will exhibit a negative charge and is called an anion.
Positively charged atoms called cations are formed when an atom loses one or more electrons. For example, a neutral
sodium atom (Z = 11) has 11 electrons. If this atom loses one electron, it will become a cation with a 1+ charge (11
− 10 = 1+). A neutral oxygen atom (Z = 8) has eight electrons, and if it gains two electrons it will become an anion
with a 2− charge (8 − 10 = 2−).

Example 2.3
Composition of an Atom
Iodine is an essential trace element in our diet; it is needed to produce thyroid hormone. Insufficient iodine
in the diet can lead to the development of a goiter, an enlargement of the thyroid gland (Figure 2.12).

80

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

Figure 2.12 (a) Insufficient iodine in the diet can cause an enlargement of the thyroid gland called a goiter.
(b) The addition of small amounts of iodine to salt, which prevents the formation of goiters, has helped
eliminate this concern in the US where salt consumption is high. (credit a: modification of work by
“Almazi”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modification of work by Mike Mozart)

The addition of small amounts of iodine to table salt (iodized salt) has essentially eliminated this health
concern in the United States, but as much as 40% of the world’s population is still at risk of iodine
deficiency. The iodine atoms are added as anions, and each has a 1− charge and a mass number of 127.
Determine the numbers of protons, neutrons, and electrons in one of these iodine anions.

Solution
The atomic number of iodine (53) tells us that a neutral iodine atom contains 53 protons in its nucleus and
53 electrons outside its nucleus. Because the sum of the numbers of protons and neutrons equals the mass
number, 127, the number of neutrons is 74 (127 − 53 = 74). Since the iodine is added as a 1− anion, the
number of electrons is 54 [53 – (1–) = 54].

Check Your Learning
An ion of platinum has a mass number of 195 and contains 74 electrons. How many protons and neutrons
does it contain, and what is its charge?
Answer: 78 protons; 117 neutrons; charge is 4+

Chemical Symbols
A chemical symbol is an abbreviation that we use to indicate an element or an atom of an element. For example, the
symbol for mercury is Hg (Figure 2.13). We use the same symbol to indicate one atom of mercury (microscopic
domain) or to label a container of many atoms of the element mercury (macroscopic domain).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

81

Figure 2.13 The symbol Hg represents the element mercury regardless of the amount; it could represent one atom
of mercury or a large amount of mercury.

The symbols for several common elements and their atoms are listed in Table 2.3. Some symbols are derived from
the common name of the element; others are abbreviations of the name in another language. Most symbols have one
or two letters, but three-letter symbols have been used to describe some elements that have atomic numbers greater
than 112. To avoid confusion with other notations, only the first letter of a symbol is capitalized. For example, Co is
the symbol for the element cobalt, but CO is the notation for the compound carbon monoxide, which contains atoms
of the elements carbon (C) and oxygen (O). All known elements and their symbols are in the periodic table in Figure
2.26 (also found in image).
Some Common Elements and Their Symbols
Element

Symbol

Element

Symbol

aluminum

Al

iron

Fe (from ferrum)

bromine

Br

lead

Pb (from plumbum)

calcium

Ca

magnesium

Mg

carbon

C

mercury

Hg (from hydrargyrum)

chlorine

Cl

nitrogen

N

chromium

Cr

oxygen

O

cobalt

Co

potassium

K (from kalium)

copper

Cu (from cuprum)

silicon

Si

fluorine

F

silver

Ag (from argentum)

gold

Au (from aurum)

sodium

Na (from natrium)

helium

He

sulfur

S

hydrogen

H

tin

Sn (from stannum)

iodine

I

zinc

Zn

Table 2.3

82

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

Traditionally, the discoverer (or discoverers) of a new element names the element. However, until the name is
recognized by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), the recommended name of the new
element is based on the Latin word(s) for its atomic number. For example, element 106 was called unnilhexium
(Unh), element 107 was called unnilseptium (Uns), and element 108 was called unniloctium (Uno) for several years.
These elements are now named after scientists (or occasionally locations); for example, element 106 is now known as
seaborgium (Sg) in honor of Glenn Seaborg, a Nobel Prize winner who was active in the discovery of several heavy
elements.

Link to Learning
Visit this site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/16IUPAC) to learn more about IUPAC,
the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, and explore its periodic
table.

Isotopes
The symbol for a specific isotope of any element is written by placing the mass number as a superscript to the
left of the element symbol (Figure 2.14). The atomic number is sometimes written as a subscript preceding the
symbol, but since this number defines the element’s identity, as does its symbol, it is often omitted. For example,
magnesium exists as a mixture of three isotopes, each with an atomic number of 12 and with mass numbers of
24, 25, and 26, respectively. These isotopes can be identified as 24Mg, 25Mg, and 26Mg. These isotope symbols are
read as “element, mass number” and can be symbolized consistent with this reading. For instance, 24Mg is read as
“magnesium 24,” and can be written as “magnesium-24” or “Mg-24.” 25Mg is read as “magnesium 25,” and can be
written as “magnesium-25” or “Mg-25.” All magnesium atoms have 12 protons in their nucleus. They differ only
because a 24Mg atom has 12 neutrons in its nucleus, a 25Mg atom has 13 neutrons, and a 26Mg has 14 neutrons.

Figure 2.14 The symbol for an atom indicates the element via its usual two-letter symbol, the mass number as a left
superscript, the atomic number as a left subscript (sometimes omitted), and the charge as a right superscript.

Information about the naturally occurring isotopes of elements with atomic numbers 1 through 10 is given in Table
2.4. Note that in addition to standard names and symbols, the isotopes of hydrogen are often referred to using
common names and accompanying symbols. Hydrogen-2, symbolized 2H, is also called deuterium and sometimes
symbolized D. Hydrogen-3, symbolized 3H, is also called tritium and sometimes symbolized T.
Nuclear Compositions of Atoms of the Very Light Elements
Element

Symbol

hydrogen

1
1H

(protium)

Atomic
Number

Number of
Protons

Number of
Neutrons

Mass
(amu)

% Natural
Abundance

1

1

0

1.0078

99.989

Table 2.4

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

83

Nuclear Compositions of Atoms of the Very Light Elements
Element

Symbol

Atomic
Number

Number of
Protons

Number of
Neutrons

Mass
(amu)

% Natural
Abundance

2
1H

1

1

1

2.0141

0.0115

3
1H

1

1

2

3.01605

— (trace)

3
2 He

2

2

1

3.01603

0.00013

4
2 He

2

2

2

4.0026

100

6
3 Li

3

3

3

6.0151

7.59

7
3 Li

3

3

4

7.0160

92.41

9
4 Be

4

4

5

9.0122

100

10
5B

5

5

5

10.0129

19.9

11
5B

5

5

6

11.0093

80.1

12
6C

6

6

6

12.0000

98.89

13
6C

6

6

7

13.0034

1.11

14
6C

6

6

8

14.0032

— (trace)

14
7N

7

7

7

14.0031

99.63

15
7N

7

7

8

15.0001

0.37

16
8O

8

8

8

15.9949

99.757

17
8O

8

8

9

16.9991

0.038

18
8O

8

8

10

17.9992

0.205

19
9F

9

9

10

18.9984

100

20
10 Ne

10

10

10

19.9924

90.48

21
10 Ne

10

10

11

20.9938

0.27

22
10 Ne

10

10

12

21.9914

9.25

(deuterium)

(tritium)

helium

lithium

beryllium

boron

carbon

nitrogen

oxygen

fluorine

neon

Table 2.4

84

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

Link to Learning
Use this Build an Atom simulator (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/
16PhetAtomBld) to build atoms of the first 10 elements, see which isotopes exist,
check nuclear stability, and gain experience with isotope symbols.

Atomic Mass
Because each proton and each neutron contribute approximately one amu to the mass of an atom, and each electron
contributes far less, the atomic mass of a single atom is approximately equal to its mass number (a whole number).
However, the average masses of atoms of most elements are not whole numbers because most elements exist naturally
as mixtures of two or more isotopes.
The mass of an element shown in a periodic table or listed in a table of atomic masses is a weighted, average mass
of all the isotopes present in a naturally occurring sample of that element. This is equal to the sum of each individual
isotope’s mass multiplied by its fractional abundance.
average mass = ∑ (fractional abundance × isotopic mass) i
i

For example, the element boron is composed of two isotopes: About 19.9% of all boron atoms are 10B with a mass of
10.0129 amu, and the remaining 80.1% are 11B with a mass of 11.0093 amu. The average atomic mass for boron is
calculated to be:
boron average mass = (0.199 × 10.0129 amu) + (0.801 × 11.0093 amu)
= 1.99 amu + 8.82 amu
= 10.81 amu
It is important to understand that no single boron atom weighs exactly 10.8 amu; 10.8 amu is the average mass of all
boron atoms, and individual boron atoms weigh either approximately 10 amu or 11 amu.

Example 2.4
Calculation of Average Atomic Mass
A meteorite found in central Indiana contains traces of the noble gas neon picked up from the solar wind
during the meteorite’s trip through the solar system. Analysis of a sample of the gas showed that it consisted
of 91.84% 20Ne (mass 19.9924 amu), 0.47% 21Ne (mass 20.9940 amu), and 7.69% 22Ne (mass 21.9914
amu). What is the average mass of the neon in the solar wind?

Solution
average mass = (0.9184 × 19.9924 amu) + (0.0047 × 20.9940 amu) + (0.0769 × 21.9914 amu)
= (18.36 + 0.099 + 1.69) amu
= 20.15 amu
The average mass of a neon atom in the solar wind is 20.15 amu. (The average mass of a terrestrial neon
atom is 20.1796 amu. This result demonstrates that we may find slight differences in the natural abundance
of isotopes, depending on their origin.)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

85

Check Your Learning
A sample of magnesium is found to contain 78.70% of 24Mg atoms (mass 23.98 amu), 10.13% of 25Mg
atoms (mass 24.99 amu), and 11.17% of 26Mg atoms (mass 25.98 amu). Calculate the average mass of a Mg
atom.
Answer: 24.31 amu

We can also do variations of this type of calculation, as shown in the next example.

Example 2.5
Calculation of Percent Abundance
Naturally occurring chlorine consists of 35Cl (mass 34.96885 amu) and 37Cl (mass 36.96590 amu), with an
average mass of 35.453 amu. What is the percent composition of Cl in terms of these two isotopes?

Solution
The average mass of chlorine is the fraction that is 35Cl times the mass of 35Cl plus the fraction that is 37Cl
times the mass of 37Cl.
average mass = (fraction of

35

Cl × mass of

35

Cl) + (fraction of

37

Cl × mass of

37

Cl)

If we let x represent the fraction that is 35Cl, then the fraction that is 37Cl is represented by 1.00 − x.
(The fraction that is 35Cl + the fraction that is 37Cl must add up to 1, so the fraction of 37Cl must equal 1.00
− the fraction of 35Cl.)
Substituting this into the average mass equation, we have:
35.453 amu = (x × 34.96885 amu) + [(1.00 − x) × 36.96590 amu]
35.453 = 34.96885x + 36.96590 − 36.96590x
1.99705x = 1.513
x = 1.513 = 0.7576
1.99705
So solving yields: x = 0.7576, which means that 1.00 − 0.7576 = 0.2424. Therefore, chlorine consists of
75.76% 35Cl and 24.24% 37Cl.

Check Your Learning
Naturally occurring copper consists of 63Cu (mass 62.9296 amu) and 65Cu (mass 64.9278 amu), with an
average mass of 63.546 amu. What is the percent composition of Cu in terms of these two isotopes?
Answer: 69.15% Cu-63 and 30.85% Cu-65

Link to Learning
Visit this site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/16PhetAtomMass) to make mixtures
of the main isotopes of the first 18 elements, gain experience with average atomic
mass, and check naturally occurring isotope ratios using the Isotopes and Atomic
Mass simulation.

The occurrence and natural abundances of isotopes can be experimentally determined using an instrument called
a mass spectrometer. Mass spectrometry (MS) is widely used in chemistry, forensics, medicine, environmental
science, and many other fields to analyze and help identify the substances in a sample of material. In a typical

86

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

mass spectrometer (Figure 2.15), the sample is vaporized and exposed to a high-energy electron beam that causes
the sample’s atoms (or molecules) to become electrically charged, typically by losing one or more electrons. These
cations then pass through a (variable) electric or magnetic field that deflects each cation’s path to an extent that
depends on both its mass and charge (similar to how the path of a large steel ball bearing rolling past a magnet is
deflected to a lesser extent that that of a small steel BB). The ions are detected, and a plot of the relative number of
ions generated versus their mass-to-charge ratios (a mass spectrum) is made. The height of each vertical feature or
peak in a mass spectrum is proportional to the fraction of cations with the specified mass-to-charge ratio. Since its
initial use during the development of modern atomic theory, MS has evolved to become a powerful tool for chemical
analysis in a wide range of applications.

Figure 2.15 Analysis of zirconium in a mass spectrometer produces a mass spectrum with peaks showing the
different isotopes of Zr.

Link to Learning
See an animation (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/16MassSpec) that explains
mass spectrometry. Watch this video (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/
16RSChemistry) from the Royal Society for Chemistry for a brief description of the
rudiments of mass spectrometry.

2.4 Chemical Formulas
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Symbolize the composition of molecules using molecular formulas and empirical formulas
• Represent the bonding arrangement of atoms within molecules using structural formulas

A molecular formula is a representation of a molecule that uses chemical symbols to indicate the types of atoms
followed by subscripts to show the number of atoms of each type in the molecule. (A subscript is used only when
more than one atom of a given type is present.) Molecular formulas are also used as abbreviations for the names of

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

87

compounds.
The structural formula for a compound gives the same information as its molecular formula (the types and numbers
of atoms in the molecule) but also shows how the atoms are connected in the molecule. The structural formula for
methane contains symbols for one C atom and four H atoms, indicating the number of atoms in the molecule (Figure
2.16). The lines represent bonds that hold the atoms together. (A chemical bond is an attraction between atoms or
ions that holds them together in a molecule or a crystal.) We will discuss chemical bonds and see how to predict the
arrangement of atoms in a molecule later. For now, simply know that the lines are an indication of how the atoms are
connected in a molecule. A ball-and-stick model shows the geometric arrangement of the atoms with atomic sizes not
to scale, and a space-filling model shows the relative sizes of the atoms.

Figure 2.16 A methane molecule can be represented as (a) a molecular formula, (b) a structural formula, (c) a balland-stick model, and (d) a space-filling model. Carbon and hydrogen atoms are represented by black and white
spheres, respectively.

Although many elements consist of discrete, individual atoms, some exist as molecules made up of two or more
atoms of the element chemically bonded together. For example, most samples of the elements hydrogen, oxygen,
and nitrogen are composed of molecules that contain two atoms each (called diatomic molecules) and thus have the
molecular formulas H2, O2, and N2, respectively. Other elements commonly found as diatomic molecules are fluorine
(F2), chlorine (Cl2), bromine (Br2), and iodine (I2). The most common form of the element sulfur is composed of
molecules that consist of eight atoms of sulfur; its molecular formula is S8 (Figure 2.17).

Figure 2.17 A molecule of sulfur is composed of eight sulfur atoms and is therefore written as S8. It can be
represented as (a) a structural formula, (b) a ball-and-stick model, and (c) a space-filling model. Sulfur atoms are
represented by yellow spheres.

It is important to note that a subscript following a symbol and a number in front of a symbol do not represent the
same thing; for example, H2 and 2H represent distinctly different species. H2 is a molecular formula; it represents
a diatomic molecule of hydrogen, consisting of two atoms of the element that are chemically bonded together. The
expression 2H, on the other hand, indicates two separate hydrogen atoms that are not combined as a unit. The
expression 2H2 represents two molecules of diatomic hydrogen (Figure 2.18).

88

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

Figure 2.18 The symbols H, 2H, H2, and 2H2 represent very different entities.

Compounds are formed when two or more elements chemically combine, resulting in the formation of bonds. For
example, hydrogen and oxygen can react to form water, and sodium and chlorine can react to form table salt. We
sometimes describe the composition of these compounds with an empirical formula, which indicates the types of
atoms present and the simplest whole-number ratio of the number of atoms (or ions) in the compound. For example,
titanium dioxide (used as pigment in white paint and in the thick, white, blocking type of sunscreen) has an empirical
formula of TiO2. This identifies the elements titanium (Ti) and oxygen (O) as the constituents of titanium dioxide,
and indicates the presence of twice as many atoms of the element oxygen as atoms of the element titanium (Figure
2.19).

Figure 2.19 (a) The white compound titanium dioxide provides effective protection from the sun. (b) A crystal of
titanium dioxide, TiO2, contains titanium and oxygen in a ratio of 1 to 2. The titanium atoms are gray and the oxygen
atoms are red. (credit a: modification of work by “osseous”/Flickr)

As discussed previously, we can describe a compound with a molecular formula, in which the subscripts indicate
the actual numbers of atoms of each element in a molecule of the compound. In many cases, the molecular formula
of a substance is derived from experimental determination of both its empirical formula and its molecular mass (the
sum of atomic masses for all atoms composing the molecule). For example, it can be determined experimentally that
benzene contains two elements, carbon (C) and hydrogen (H), and that for every carbon atom in benzene, there is one
hydrogen atom. Thus, the empirical formula is CH. An experimental determination of the molecular mass reveals that
a molecule of benzene contains six carbon atoms and six hydrogen atoms, so the molecular formula for benzene is
C6H6 (Figure 2.20).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

89

Figure 2.20 Benzene, C6H6, is produced during oil refining and has many industrial uses. A benzene molecule can
be represented as (a) a structural formula, (b) a ball-and-stick model, and (c) a space-filling model. (d) Benzene is a
clear liquid. (credit d: modification of work by Sahar Atwa)

If we know a compound’s formula, we can easily determine the empirical formula. (This is somewhat of an academic
exercise; the reverse chronology is generally followed in actual practice.) For example, the molecular formula for
acetic acid, the component that gives vinegar its sharp taste, is C2H4O2. This formula indicates that a molecule of
acetic acid (Figure 2.21) contains two carbon atoms, four hydrogen atoms, and two oxygen atoms. The ratio of
atoms is 2:4:2. Dividing by the lowest common denominator (2) gives the simplest, whole-number ratio of atoms,
1:2:1, so the empirical formula is CH2O. Note that a molecular formula is always a whole-number multiple of an
empirical formula.

Figure 2.21 (a) Vinegar contains acetic acid, C2H4O2, which has an empirical formula of CH2O. It can be
represented as (b) a structural formula and (c) as a ball-and-stick model. (credit a: modification of work by “HomeSpot
HQ”/Flickr)

Example 2.6
Empirical and Molecular Formulas
Molecules of glucose (blood sugar) contain 6 carbon atoms, 12 hydrogen atoms, and 6 oxygen atoms. What
are the molecular and empirical formulas of glucose?

Solution
The molecular formula is C6H12O6 because one molecule actually contains 6 C, 12 H, and 6 O atoms. The
simplest whole-number ratio of C to H to O atoms in glucose is 1:2:1, so the empirical formula is CH 2O.

90

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

Check Your Learning
A molecule of metaldehyde (a pesticide used for snails and slugs) contains 8 carbon atoms, 16 hydrogen
atoms, and 4 oxygen atoms. What are the molecular and empirical formulas of metaldehyde?
Answer: Molecular formula, C8H16O4; empirical formula, C2H4O

Link to Learning
You can explore molecule building (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/
16molbuilding) using an online simulation.

Portrait of a Chemist
Lee Cronin
What is it that chemists do? According to Lee Cronin (Figure 2.22), chemists make very complicated
molecules by “chopping up” small molecules and “reverse engineering” them. He wonders if we could “make a
really cool universal chemistry set” by what he calls “app-ing” chemistry. Could we “app” chemistry?
In a 2012 TED talk, Lee describes one fascinating possibility: combining a collection of chemical “inks” with
a 3D printer capable of fabricating a reaction apparatus (tiny test tubes, beakers, and the like) to fashion
a “universal toolkit of chemistry.” This toolkit could be used to create custom-tailored drugs to fight a new
superbug or to “print” medicine personally configured to your genetic makeup, environment, and health
situation. Says Cronin, “What Apple did for music, I’d like to do for the discovery and distribution of prescription
drugs.”[2] View his full talk (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/16LeeCronin) at the TED website.

2. Lee Cronin, “Print Your Own Medicine,” Talk presented at TED Global 2012, Edinburgh, Scotland, June 2012.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

91

Figure 2.22 Chemist Lee Cronin has been named one of the UK’s 10 most inspirational scientists. The
youngest chair at the University of Glasgow, Lee runs a large research group, collaborates with many
scientists worldwide, has published over 250 papers in top scientific journals, and has given more than 150
invited talks. His research focuses on complex chemical systems and their potential to transform technology,
but also branches into nanoscience, solar fuels, synthetic biology, and even artificial life and evolution. (credit:
image courtesy of Lee Cronin)

It is important to be aware that it may be possible for the same atoms to be arranged in different ways: Compounds
with the same molecular formula may have different atom-to-atom bonding and therefore different structures. For
example, could there be another compound with the same formula as acetic acid, C2H4O2? And if so, what would be
the structure of its molecules?
If you predict that another compound with the formula C2H4O2 could exist, then you demonstrated good chemical
insight and are correct. Two C atoms, four H atoms, and two O atoms can also be arranged to form a methyl formate,
which is used in manufacturing, as an insecticide, and for quick-drying finishes. Methyl formate molecules have
one of the oxygen atoms between the two carbon atoms, differing from the arrangement in acetic acid molecules.
Acetic acid and methyl formate are examples of isomers—compounds with the same chemical formula but different
molecular structures (Figure 2.23). Note that this small difference in the arrangement of the atoms has a major
effect on their respective chemical properties. You would certainly not want to use a solution of methyl formate as a
substitute for a solution of acetic acid (vinegar) when you make salad dressing.

92

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

Figure 2.23 Molecules of (a) acetic acid and methyl formate (b) are structural isomers; they have the same formula
(C2H4O2) but different structures (and therefore different chemical properties).

Many types of isomers exist (Figure 2.24). Acetic acid and methyl formate are structural isomers, compounds in
which the molecules differ in how the atoms are connected to each other. There are also various types of spatial
isomers, in which the relative orientations of the atoms in space can be different. For example, the compound carvone
(found in caraway seeds, spearmint, and mandarin orange peels) consists of two isomers that are mirror images of
each other. S-(+)-carvone smells like caraway, and R-(−)-carvone smells like spearmint.

Figure 2.24 Molecules of carvone are spatial isomers; they only differ in the relative orientations of the atoms in
space. (credit bottom left: modification of work by “Miansari66”/Wikimedia Commons; credit bottom right: modification
of work by Forest & Kim Starr)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

93

Link to Learning
Select this link (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/16isomers) to view an explanation
of isomers, spatial isomers, and why they have different smells (select the video
titled “Mirror Molecule: Carvone”).

2.5 The Periodic Table
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State the periodic law and explain the organization of elements in the periodic table
• Predict the general properties of elements based on their location within the periodic table
• Identify metals, nonmetals, and metalloids by their properties and/or location on the periodic table

As early chemists worked to purify ores and discovered more elements, they realized that various elements could
be grouped together by their similar chemical behaviors. One such grouping includes lithium (Li), sodium (Na), and
potassium (K): These elements all are shiny, conduct heat and electricity well, and have similar chemical properties.
A second grouping includes calcium (Ca), strontium (Sr), and barium (Ba), which also are shiny, good conductors of
heat and electricity, and have chemical properties in common. However, the specific properties of these two groupings
are notably different from each other. For example: Li, Na, and K are much more reactive than are Ca, Sr, and Ba; Li,
Na, and K form compounds with oxygen in a ratio of two of their atoms to one oxygen atom, whereas Ca, Sr, and Ba
form compounds with one of their atoms to one oxygen atom. Fluorine (F), chlorine (Cl), bromine (Br), and iodine
(I) also exhibit similar properties to each other, but these properties are drastically different from those of any of the
elements above.
Dimitri Mendeleev in Russia (1869) and Lothar Meyer in Germany (1870) independently recognized that there was a
periodic relationship among the properties of the elements known at that time. Both published tables with the elements
arranged according to increasing atomic mass. But Mendeleev went one step further than Meyer: He used his table
to predict the existence of elements that would have the properties similar to aluminum and silicon, but were yet
unknown. The discoveries of gallium (1875) and germanium (1886) provided great support for Mendeleev’s work.
Although Mendeleev and Meyer had a long dispute over priority, Mendeleev’s contributions to the development of
the periodic table are now more widely recognized (Figure 2.25).

94

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

Figure 2.25 (a) Dimitri Mendeleev is widely credited with creating (b) the first periodic table of the elements. (credit
a: modification of work by Serge Lachinov; credit b: modification of work by “Den fjättrade ankan”/Wikimedia
Commons)

By the twentieth century, it became apparent that the periodic relationship involved atomic numbers rather than
atomic masses. The modern statement of this relationship, the periodic law, is as follows: the properties of the
elements are periodic functions of their atomic numbers. A modern periodic table arranges the elements in increasing
order of their atomic numbers and groups atoms with similar properties in the same vertical column (Figure 2.26).
Each box represents an element and contains its atomic number, symbol, average atomic mass, and (sometimes) name.
The elements are arranged in seven horizontal rows, called periods or series, and 18 vertical columns, called groups.
Groups are labeled at the top of each column. In the United States, the labels traditionally were numerals with capital
letters. However, IUPAC recommends that the numbers 1 through 18 be used, and these labels are more common. For
the table to fit on a single page, parts of two of the rows, a total of 14 columns, are usually written below the main
body of the table.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

95

Figure 2.26 Elements in the periodic table are organized according to their properties.

Many elements differ dramatically in their chemical and physical properties, but some elements are similar in their
behaviors. For example, many elements appear shiny, are malleable (able to be deformed without breaking) and
ductile (can be drawn into wires), and conduct heat and electricity well. Other elements are not shiny, malleable, or
ductile, and are poor conductors of heat and electricity. We can sort the elements into large classes with common
properties: metals (elements that are shiny, malleable, good conductors of heat and electricity—shaded yellow);
nonmetals (elements that appear dull, poor conductors of heat and electricity—shaded green); and metalloids
(elements that conduct heat and electricity moderately well, and possess some properties of metals and some
properties of nonmetals—shaded purple).
The elements can also be classified into the main-group elements (or representative elements) in the columns
labeled 1, 2, and 13–18; the transition metals in the columns labeled 3–12; and inner transition metals in the
two rows at the bottom of the table (the top-row elements are called lanthanides and the bottom-row elements are
actinides; Figure 2.27). The elements can be subdivided further by more specific properties, such as the composition
of the compounds they form. For example, the elements in group 1 (the first column) form compounds that consist
of one atom of the element and one atom of hydrogen. These elements (except hydrogen) are known as alkali
metals, and they all have similar chemical properties. The elements in group 2 (the second column) form compounds
consisting of one atom of the element and two atoms of hydrogen: These are called alkaline earth metals, with
similar properties among members of that group. Other groups with specific names are the pnictogens (group 15),
chalcogens (group 16), halogens (group 17), and the noble gases (group 18, also known as inert gases). The groups

96

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

can also be referred to by the first element of the group: For example, the chalcogens can be called the oxygen group
or oxygen family. Hydrogen is a unique, nonmetallic element with properties similar to both group 1 and group 17
elements. For that reason, hydrogen may be shown at the top of both groups, or by itself.

Figure 2.27 The periodic table organizes elements with similar properties into groups.

Link to Learning
Click on this link (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/16Periodic) for an interactive
periodic table, which you can use to explore the properties of the elements
(includes podcasts and videos of each element). You may also want to try this one
that shows photos of all the elements.

Example 2.7
Naming Groups of Elements
Atoms of each of the following elements are essential for life. Give the group name for the following
elements:
(a) chlorine
(b) calcium
(c) sodium
(d) sulfur

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

97

Solution
The family names are as follows:
(a) halogen
(b) alkaline earth metal
(c) alkali metal
(d) chalcogen

Check Your Learning
Give the group name for each of the following elements:
(a) krypton
(b) selenium
(c) barium
(d) lithium
Answer: (a) noble gas; (b) chalcogen; (c) alkaline earth metal; (d) alkali metal

In studying the periodic table, you might have noticed something about the atomic masses of some of the elements.
Element 43 (technetium), element 61 (promethium), and most of the elements with atomic number 84 (polonium)
and higher have their atomic mass given in square brackets. This is done for elements that consist entirely of
unstable, radioactive isotopes (you will learn more about radioactivity in the nuclear chemistry chapter). An average
atomic weight cannot be determined for these elements because their radioisotopes may vary significantly in relative
abundance, depending on the source, or may not even exist in nature. The number in square brackets is the atomic
mass number (an approximate atomic mass) of the most stable isotope of that element.

2.6 Molecular and Ionic Compounds
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define ionic and molecular (covalent) compounds
• Predict the type of compound formed from elements based on their location within the periodic table
• Determine formulas for simple ionic compounds

In ordinary chemical reactions, the nucleus of each atom (and thus the identity of the element) remains unchanged.
Electrons, however, can be added to atoms by transfer from other atoms, lost by transfer to other atoms, or shared
with other atoms. The transfer and sharing of electrons among atoms govern the chemistry of the elements. During
the formation of some compounds, atoms gain or lose electrons, and form electrically charged particles called ions
(Figure 2.28).

98

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

Figure 2.28 (a) A sodium atom (Na) has equal numbers of protons and electrons (11) and is uncharged. (b) A
sodium cation (Na+) has lost an electron, so it has one more proton (11) than electrons (10), giving it an overall
positive charge, signified by a superscripted plus sign.

You can use the periodic table to predict whether an atom will form an anion or a cation, and you can often predict
the charge of the resulting ion. Atoms of many main-group metals lose enough electrons to leave them with the same
number of electrons as an atom of the preceding noble gas. To illustrate, an atom of an alkali metal (group 1) loses
one electron and forms a cation with a 1+ charge; an alkaline earth metal (group 2) loses two electrons and forms a
cation with a 2+ charge, and so on. For example, a neutral calcium atom, with 20 protons and 20 electrons, readily
loses two electrons. This results in a cation with 20 protons, 18 electrons, and a 2+ charge. It has the same number of
electrons as atoms of the preceding noble gas, argon, and is symbolized Ca2+. The name of a metal ion is the same as
the name of the metal atom from which it forms, so Ca2+ is called a calcium ion.
When atoms of nonmetal elements form ions, they generally gain enough electrons to give them the same number of
electrons as an atom of the next noble gas in the periodic table. Atoms of group 17 gain one electron and form anions
with a 1− charge; atoms of group 16 gain two electrons and form ions with a 2− charge, and so on. For example, the
neutral bromine atom, with 35 protons and 35 electrons, can gain one electron to provide it with 36 electrons. This
results in an anion with 35 protons, 36 electrons, and a 1− charge. It has the same number of electrons as atoms of the
next noble gas, krypton, and is symbolized Br−. (A discussion of the theory supporting the favored status of noble gas
electron numbers reflected in these predictive rules for ion formation is provided in a later chapter of this text.)
Note the usefulness of the periodic table in predicting likely ion formation and charge (Figure 2.29). Moving from
the far left to the right on the periodic table, main-group elements tend to form cations with a charge equal to the
group number. That is, group 1 elements form 1+ ions; group 2 elements form 2+ ions, and so on. Moving from the
far right to the left on the periodic table, elements often form anions with a negative charge equal to the number of
groups moved left from the noble gases. For example, group 17 elements (one group left of the noble gases) form 1−
ions; group 16 elements (two groups left) form 2− ions, and so on. This trend can be used as a guide in many cases,
but its predictive value decreases when moving toward the center of the periodic table. In fact, transition metals and
some other metals often exhibit variable charges that are not predictable by their location in the table. For example,
copper can form ions with a 1+ or 2+ charge, and iron can form ions with a 2+ or 3+ charge.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

99

Figure 2.29 Some elements exhibit a regular pattern of ionic charge when they form ions.

Example 2.8
Composition of Ions
An ion found in some compounds used as antiperspirants contains 13 protons and 10 electrons. What is its
symbol?

Solution
Because the number of protons remains unchanged when an atom forms an ion, the atomic number of the
element must be 13. Knowing this lets us use the periodic table to identify the element as Al (aluminum).
The Al atom has lost three electrons and thus has three more positive charges (13) than it has electrons (10).
This is the aluminum cation, Al3+.

Check Your Learning
Give the symbol and name for the ion with 34 protons and 36 electrons.
Answer: Se2−, the selenide ion

Example 2.9
Formation of Ions
Magnesium and nitrogen react to form an ionic compound. Predict which forms an anion, which forms a
cation, and the charges of each ion. Write the symbol for each ion and name them.

100

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

Solution
Magnesium’s position in the periodic table (group 2) tells us that it is a metal. Metals form positive ions
(cations). A magnesium atom must lose two electrons to have the same number electrons as an atom of the
previous noble gas, neon. Thus, a magnesium atom will form a cation with two fewer electrons than protons
and a charge of 2+. The symbol for the ion is Mg2+, and it is called a magnesium ion.
Nitrogen’s position in the periodic table (group 15) reveals that it is a nonmetal. Nonmetals form negative
ions (anions). A nitrogen atom must gain three electrons to have the same number of electrons as an atom
of the following noble gas, neon. Thus, a nitrogen atom will form an anion with three more electrons than
protons and a charge of 3−. The symbol for the ion is N3−, and it is called a nitride ion.

Check Your Learning
Aluminum and carbon react to form an ionic compound. Predict which forms an anion, which forms a
cation, and the charges of each ion. Write the symbol for each ion and name them.
Answer: Al will form a cation with a charge of 3+: Al3+, an aluminum ion. Carbon will form an anion with
a charge of 4−: C4−, a carbide ion.

The ions that we have discussed so far are called monatomic ions, that is, they are ions formed from only one atom.
We also find many polyatomic ions. These ions, which act as discrete units, are electrically charged molecules (a
group of bonded atoms with an overall charge). Some of the more important polyatomic ions are listed in Table 2.5.
Oxyanions are polyatomic ions that contain one or more oxygen atoms. At this point in your study of chemistry, you
should memorize the names, formulas, and charges of the most common polyatomic ions. Because you will use them
repeatedly, they will soon become familiar.
Common Polyatomic Ions
Name

Formula

Related Acid

Formula

ammonium

NH 4 +

hydronium

H 3 O+

peroxide

O 2 2-

hydroxide

OH-

acetate

CH 3 COO -

acetic acid

CH3COOH

cyanide

CN−

hydrocyanic acid

HCN

azide

N3 -

hydrazoic acid

HN3

carbonate

CO 3 2-

carbonic acid

H2CO3

bicarbonate

HCO 3 -

nitrate

NO 3 −

nitric acid

HNO3

nitrite

NO 2 −

nitrous acid

HNO2

sulfate

SO 4 2−

sulfiric acid

H2SO4

hydrogen sulfate

HSO 4 −

Table 2.5

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

101

Common Polyatomic Ions
Name

Formula

Related Acid

Formula

sulfite

SO 3 2−

sulfurous acid

H2SO3

hydrogen sulfite

HSO 3 −

phosphate

PO 4 3−

phosphoric acid

H3PO4

hydrogen phosphate

HPO 4 2−

dihydrogen phosphate

H 2 PO 4 −

perchlorate

ClO 4 −

perchloric acid

HClO4

chlorate

ClO 3 −

chloric acid

HClO3

chlorite

ClO 2 −

chlorous acid

HClO2

hypochlorite

ClO−

hypochlorous acid

HClO

chromate

CrO 4 2−

chromic acid

H2Cr2O4

dichromate

Cr 2 O 7 2−

dichromic acid

H2Cr2O7

permanganate

MnO 4 −

permanganic acid

HMnO4

Table 2.5

Note that there is a system for naming some polyatomic ions; -ate and -ite are suffixes designating polyatomic ions
containing more or fewer oxygen atoms. Per- (short for “hyper”) and hypo- (meaning “under”) are prefixes meaning
more oxygen atoms than -ate and fewer oxygen atoms than -ite, respectively. For example, perchlorate is ClO 4 − ,
chlorate is ClO 3 − , chlorite is ClO 2 − and hypochlorite is ClO−. Unfortunately, the number of oxygen atoms
corresponding to a given suffix or prefix is not consistent; for example, nitrate is NO 3 − while sulfate is SO 4 2−.
This will be covered in more detail in the next module on nomenclature.

The nature of the attractive forces that hold atoms or ions together within a compound is the basis for classifying
chemical bonding. When electrons are transferred and ions form, ionic bonds result. Ionic bonds are electrostatic
forces of attraction, that is, the attractive forces experienced between objects of opposite electrical charge (in this case,
cations and anions). When electrons are “shared” and molecules form, covalent bonds result. Covalent bonds are the
attractive forces between the positively charged nuclei of the bonded atoms and one or more pairs of electrons that
are located between the atoms. Compounds are classified as ionic or molecular (covalent) on the basis of the bonds
present in them.

Ionic Compounds
When an element composed of atoms that readily lose electrons (a metal) reacts with an element composed of atoms
that readily gain electrons (a nonmetal), a transfer of electrons usually occurs, producing ions. The compound formed
by this transfer is stabilized by the electrostatic attractions (ionic bonds) between the ions of opposite charge present
in the compound. For example, when each sodium atom in a sample of sodium metal (group 1) gives up one electron
to form a sodium cation, Na+, and each chlorine atom in a sample of chlorine gas (group 17) accepts one electron to
form a chloride anion, Cl−, the resulting compound, NaCl, is composed of sodium ions and chloride ions in the ratio
of one Na+ ion for each Cl− ion. Similarly, each calcium atom (group 2) can give up two electrons and transfer one

102

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

to each of two chlorine atoms to form CaCl2, which is composed of Ca2+ and Cl− ions in the ratio of one Ca2+ ion to
two Cl− ions.
A compound that contains ions and is held together by ionic bonds is called an ionic compound. The periodic table
can help us recognize many of the compounds that are ionic: When a metal is combined with one or more nonmetals,
the compound is usually ionic. This guideline works well for predicting ionic compound formation for most of the
compounds typically encountered in an introductory chemistry course. However, it is not always true (for example,
aluminum chloride, AlCl3, is not ionic).
You can often recognize ionic compounds because of their properties. Ionic compounds are solids that typically melt
at high temperatures and boil at even higher temperatures. For example, sodium chloride melts at 801 °C and boils
at 1413 °C. (As a comparison, the molecular compound water melts at 0 °C and boils at 100 °C.) In solid form, an
ionic compound is not electrically conductive because its ions are unable to flow (“electricity” is the flow of charged
particles). When molten, however, it can conduct electricity because its ions are able to move freely through the liquid
(Figure 2.30).

Figure 2.30 Sodium chloride melts at 801 °C and conducts electricity when molten. (credit: modification of work by
Mark Blaser and Matt Evans)

Link to Learning
Watch this video (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/16moltensalt) to see a mixture of
salts melt and conduct electricity.

In every ionic compound, the total number of positive charges of the cations equals the total number of negative
charges of the anions. Thus, ionic compounds are electrically neutral overall, even though they contain positive and
negative ions. We can use this observation to help us write the formula of an ionic compound. The formula of an ionic
compound must have a ratio of ions such that the numbers of positive and negative charges are equal.

Example 2.10
Predicting the Formula of an Ionic Compound
The gemstone sapphire (Figure 2.31) is mostly a compound of aluminum and oxygen that contains
aluminum cations, Al3+, and oxygen anions, O2−. What is the formula of this compound?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

103

Figure 2.31 Although pure aluminum oxide is colorless, trace amounts of iron and titanium give blue
sapphire its characteristic color. (credit: modification of work by Stanislav Doronenko)

Solution
Because the ionic compound must be electrically neutral, it must have the same number of positive and
negative charges. Two aluminum ions, each with a charge of 3+, would give us six positive charges, and
three oxide ions, each with a charge of 2−, would give us six negative charges. The formula would be Al2O3.

Check Your Learning
Predict the formula of the ionic compound formed between the sodium cation, Na+, and the sulfide anion,
S2−.
Answer: Na2S

Many ionic compounds contain polyatomic ions (Table 2.5) as the cation, the anion, or both. As with simple ionic
compounds, these compounds must also be electrically neutral, so their formulas can be predicted by treating the
polyatomic ions as discrete units. We use parentheses in a formula to indicate a group of atoms that behave as a
unit. For example, the formula for calcium phosphate, one of the minerals in our bones, is Ca3(PO4)2. This formula
indicates that there are three calcium ions (Ca2+) for every two phosphate (PO 4 3−) groups. The PO 4 3− groups are
discrete units, each consisting of one phosphorus atom and four oxygen atoms, and having an overall charge of 3−.
The compound is electrically neutral, and its formula shows a total count of three Ca, two P, and eight O atoms.

Example 2.11
Predicting the Formula of a Compound with a Polyatomic Anion
Baking powder contains calcium dihydrogen phosphate, an ionic compound composed of the ions Ca2+ and
H 2 PO 4 − . What is the formula of this compound?

Solution
The positive and negative charges must balance, and this ionic compound must be electrically neutral. Thus,
we must have two negative charges to balance the 2+ charge of the calcium ion. This requires a ratio of one
Ca2+ ion to two H 2 PO 4 − ions. We designate this by enclosing the formula for the dihydrogen phosphate
ion in parentheses and adding a subscript 2. The formula is Ca(H2PO4)2.

Check Your Learning
Predict the formula of the ionic compound formed between the lithium ion and the peroxide ion, O 2 2−
(Hint: Use the periodic table to predict the sign and the charge on the lithium ion.)
Answer: Li2O2

Because an ionic compound is not made up of single, discrete molecules, it may not be properly symbolized using
a molecular formula. Instead, ionic compounds must be symbolized by a formula indicating the relative numbers

104

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

of its constituent ions. For compounds containing only monatomic ions (such as NaCl) and for many compounds
containing polyatomic ions (such as CaSO4), these formulas are just the empirical formulas introduced earlier in this
chapter. However, the formulas for some ionic compounds containing polyatomic ions are not empirical formulas.
For example, the ionic compound sodium oxalate is comprised of Na+ and C 2 O 4 2− ions combined in a 2:1 ratio,
and its formula is written as Na2C2O4. The subscripts in this formula are not the smallest-possible whole numbers, as
each can be divided by 2 to yield the empirical formula, NaCO2. This is not the accepted formula for sodium oxalate,
however, as it does not accurately represent the compound’s polyatomic anion, C 2 O 4 2−.

Molecular Compounds
Many compounds do not contain ions but instead consist solely of discrete, neutral molecules. These molecular
compounds (covalent compounds) result when atoms share, rather than transfer (gain or lose), electrons. Covalent
bonding is an important and extensive concept in chemistry, and it will be treated in considerable detail in a later
chapter of this text. We can often identify molecular compounds on the basis of their physical properties. Under
normal conditions, molecular compounds often exist as gases, low-boiling liquids, and low-melting solids, although
many important exceptions exist.
Whereas ionic compounds are usually formed when a metal and a nonmetal combine, covalent compounds are usually
formed by a combination of nonmetals. Thus, the periodic table can help us recognize many of the compounds that are
covalent. While we can use the positions of a compound’s elements in the periodic table to predict whether it is ionic
or covalent at this point in our study of chemistry, you should be aware that this is a very simplistic approach that does
not account for a number of interesting exceptions. Shades of gray exist between ionic and molecular compounds,
and you’ll learn more about those later.

Example 2.12
Predicting the Type of Bonding in Compounds
Predict whether the following compounds are ionic or molecular:
(a) KI, the compound used as a source of iodine in table salt
(b) H2O2, the bleach and disinfectant hydrogen peroxide
(c) CHCl3, the anesthetic chloroform
(d) Li2CO3, a source of lithium in antidepressants

Solution
(a) Potassium (group 1) is a metal, and iodine (group 17) is a nonmetal; KI is predicted to be ionic.
(b) Hydrogen (group 1) is a nonmetal, and oxygen (group 16) is a nonmetal; H2O2 is predicted to be
molecular.
(c) Carbon (group 14) is a nonmetal, hydrogen (group 1) is a nonmetal, and chlorine (group 17) is a
nonmetal; CHCl3 is predicted to be molecular.
(d) Lithium (group 1) is a metal, and carbonate is a polyatomic ion; Li2CO3 is predicted to be ionic.

Check Your Learning
Using the periodic table, predict whether the following compounds are ionic or covalent:
(a) SO2
(b) CaF2
(c) N2H4

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

105

(d) Al2(SO4)3
Answer: (a) molecular; (b) ionic; (c) molecular; (d) ionic

2.7 Chemical Nomenclature
By the end of this module, you will be able to:
• Derive names for common types of inorganic compounds using a systematic approach

Nomenclature, a collection of rules for naming things, is important in science and in many other situations. This
module describes an approach that is used to name simple ionic and molecular compounds, such as NaCl, CaCO3, and
N2O4. The simplest of these are binary compounds, those containing only two elements, but we will also consider
how to name ionic compounds containing polyatomic ions, and one specific, very important class of compounds
known as acids (subsequent chapters in this text will focus on these compounds in great detail). We will limit our
attention here to inorganic compounds, compounds that are composed principally of elements other than carbon, and
will follow the nomenclature guidelines proposed by IUPAC. The rules for organic compounds, in which carbon is
the principle element, will be treated in a later chapter on organic chemistry.

Ionic Compounds
To name an inorganic compound, we need to consider the answers to several questions. First, is the compound ionic or
molecular? If the compound is ionic, does the metal form ions of only one type (fixed charge) or more than one type
(variable charge)? Are the ions monatomic or polyatomic? If the compound is molecular, does it contain hydrogen? If
so, does it also contain oxygen? From the answers we derive, we place the compound in an appropriate category and
then name it accordingly.

Compounds Containing Only Monatomic Ions
The name of a binary compound containing monatomic ions consists of the name of the cation (the name of the metal)
followed by the name of the anion (the name of the nonmetallic element with its ending replaced by the suffix –ide).
Some examples are given in Table 2.6.
Names of Some Ionic Compounds
NaCl, sodium chloride

Na2O, sodium oxide

KBr, potassium bromide

CdS, cadmium sulfide

CaI2, calcium iodide

Mg3N2, magnesium nitride

CsF, cesium fluoride

Ca3P2, calcium phosphide

LiCl, lithium chloride

Al4C3, aluminum carbide

Table 2.6

Compounds Containing Polyatomic Ions
Compounds containing polyatomic ions are named similarly to those containing only monatomic ions, i.e. by naming
first the cation and then the anion. Examples are shown in Table 2.7.

106

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

Names of Some Polyatomic Ionic Compounds
KC2H3O2, potassium acetate

NH4Cl, ammonium chloride

NaHCO3, sodium bicarbonate

CaSO4, calcium sulfate

Al2(CO3)3, aluminum carbonate

Mg3(PO4)2, magnesium phosphate

Table 2.7

Chemistry in Everyday Life
Ionic Compounds in Your Cabinets
Every day you encounter and use a large number of ionic compounds. Some of these compounds, where they
are found, and what they are used for are listed in Table 2.8. Look at the label or ingredients list on the various
products that you use during the next few days, and see if you run into any of those in this table, or find other
ionic compounds that you could now name or write as a formula.

Everyday Ionic Compounds
Ionic Compound

Use

NaCl, sodium chloride

ordinary table salt

KI, potassium iodide

added to “iodized” salt for thyroid health

NaF, sodium fluoride

ingredient in toothpaste

NaHCO3, sodium bicarbonate

baking soda; used in cooking (and as antacid)

Na2CO3, sodium carbonate

washing soda; used in cleaning agents

NaOCl, sodium hypochlorite

active ingredient in household bleach

CaCO3 calcium carbonate

ingredient in antacids

Mg(OH)2, magnesium hydroxide

ingredient in antacids

Al(OH)3, aluminum hydroxide

ingredient in antacids

NaOH, sodium hydroxide

lye; used as drain cleaner

K3PO4, potassium phosphate

food additive (many purposes)

MgSO4, magnesium sulfate

added to purified water

Na2HPO4, sodium hydrogen phosphate

anti-caking agent; used in powdered products

Na2SO3, sodium sulfite

preservative

Table 2.8

Compounds Containing a Metal Ion with a Variable Charge
Most of the transition metals can form two or more cations with different charges. Compounds of these metals with
nonmetals are named with the same method as compounds in the first category, except the charge of the metal
ion is specified by a Roman numeral in parentheses after the name of the metal. The charge of the metal ion is

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

107

determined from the formula of the compound and the charge of the anion. For example, consider binary ionic
compounds of iron and chlorine. Iron typically exhibits a charge of either 2+ or 3+ (see Figure 2.29), and the two
corresponding compound formulas are FeCl2 and FeCl3. The simplest name, “iron chloride,” will, in this case, be
ambiguous, as it does not distinguish between these two compounds. In cases like this, the charge of the metal ion is
included as a Roman numeral in parentheses immediately following the metal name. These two compounds are then
unambiguously named iron(II) chloride and iron(III) chloride, respectively. Other examples are provided in Table
2.9.
Names of Some Transition Metal Ionic Compounds
Transition Metal Ionic Compound

Name

FeCl3

iron(III) chloride

Hg2O

mercury(I) oxide

HgO

mercury(II) oxide

Cu3(PO4)2

copper(II) phosphate

Table 2.9

Out-of-date nomenclature used the suffixes –ic and –ous to designate metals with higher and lower charges,
respectively: Iron(III) chloride, FeCl3, was previously called ferric chloride, and iron(II) chloride, FeCl2, was known
as ferrous chloride. Though this naming convention has been largely abandoned by the scientific community, it
remains in use by some segments of industry. For example, you may see the words stannous fluoride on a tube of
toothpaste. This represents the formula SnF2, which is more properly named tin(II) fluoride. The other fluoride of tin
is SnF4, which was previously called stannic fluoride but is now named tin(IV) fluoride.

Example 2.13
Naming Ionic Compounds
Name the following ionic compounds, which contain a metal that can have more than one ionic charge:
(a) Fe2S3
(b) CuSe
(c) GaN
(d) CrCl3
(e) Ti2(SO4)3

Solution
The anions in these compounds have a fixed negative charge (S2−, Se2− , N3−, Cl−, and SO 4 2− ), and the
compounds must be neutral. Because the total number of positive charges in each compound must equal the
total number of negative charges, the positive ions must be Fe3+, Cu2+, Ga3+, Cr3+, and Ti3+. These charges
are used in the names of the metal ions:
(a) iron(III) sulfide
(b) copper(II) selenide
(c) gallium(III) nitride
(d) chromium(III) chloride
(e) titanium(III) sulfate

108

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

Check Your Learning
Write the formulas of the following ionic compounds:
(a) chromium(III) phosphide
(b) mercury(II) sulfide
(c) manganese(II) phosphate
(d) copper(I) oxide
(e) chromium(VI) fluoride
Answer: (a) CrP; (b) HgS; (c) Mn3(PO4)2; (d) Cu2O; (e) CrF6

Chemistry in Everyday Life
Erin Brokovich and Chromium Contamination
In the early 1990s, legal file clerk Erin Brockovich (Figure 2.32) discovered a high rate of serious illnesses
in the small town of Hinckley, California. Her investigation eventually linked the illnesses to groundwater
contaminated by Cr(VI) used by Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) to fight corrosion in a nearby natural gas
pipeline. As dramatized in the film Erin Brokovich (for which Julia Roberts won an Oscar), Erin and lawyer
Edward Masry sued PG&E for contaminating the water near Hinckley in 1993. The settlement they won in
1996—$333 million—was the largest amount ever awarded for a direct-action lawsuit in the US at that time.

Figure 2.32 (a) Erin Brockovich found that Cr(VI), used by PG&E, had contaminated the Hinckley,
California, water supply. (b) The Cr(VI) ion is often present in water as the polyatomic ions chromate,
CrO 4 2− (left), and dichromate, Cr 2 O 7 2− (right).
Chromium compounds are widely used in industry, such as for chrome plating, in dye-making, as
preservatives, and to prevent corrosion in cooling tower water, as occurred near Hinckley. In the environment,
chromium exists primarily in either the Cr(III) or Cr(VI) forms. Cr(III), an ingredient of many vitamin and
nutritional supplements, forms compounds that are not very soluble in water, and it has low toxicity. But Cr(VI)
is much more toxic and forms compounds that are reasonably soluble in water. Exposure to small amounts of
Cr(VI) can lead to damage of the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and immune systems, as well as the kidneys,
liver, blood, and skin.
Despite cleanup efforts, Cr(VI) groundwater contamination remains a problem in Hinckley and other locations
across the globe. A 2010 study by the Environmental Working Group found that of 35 US cities tested, 31 had

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11760/1.9

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

109

higher levels of Cr(VI) in their tap water than the public health goal of 0.02 parts per billion set by the California
Environmental Protection Agency.

Molecular (Covalent) Compounds
The bonding characteristics of inorganic molecular compounds are different from ionic compounds, and they are
named using a different system as well. The charges of cations and anions dictate their ratios in ionic compounds, so
specifying the names of the ions provides sufficient information to determine chemical formulas. However, because
covalent bonding allows for significant variation in the combination ratios of the atoms in a molecule, the names for
molecular compounds must explicitly identify these ratios.

Compounds Composed of Two Elements
When two nonmetallic elements form a molecular compound, several combination ratios are often possible. For
example, carbon and oxygen can form the compounds CO and CO2. Since these are different substances with different
properties, they cannot both have the same name (they cannot both be called carbon oxide). To deal with this situation,
we use a naming method that is somewhat similar to that used for ionic compounds, but with added prefixes to specify
the numbers of atoms of each element. The name of the more metallic element (the one farther to the left and/or
bottom of the periodic table) is first, followed by the name of the more nonmetallic element (the one farther to the
right and/or top) with its ending changed to the suffix –ide. The numbers of atoms of each element are designated by
the Greek prefixes shown in Table 2.10.
Nomenclature Prefixes
Number

Prefix

Number

Prefix

1 (sometimes omitted)

mono-

6

hexa-

2

di-

7

hepta-

3

tri-

8

octa-

4

tetra-

9

nona-

5

penta-

10

deca-

Table 2.10

When only one atom of the first element is present, the prefix mono- is usually deleted from that part. Thus, CO is
named carbon monoxide, and CO2 is called carbon dioxide. When two vowels are adjacent, the a in the Greek prefix
is usually dropped. Some other examples are shown in Table 2.11.
Names of Some Molecular Compounds Composed of Two Elements
Compound

Name

Compound

Name

SO2

sulfur dioxide

BCl3

boron trichloride

SO3

sulfur trioxide

SF6

sulfur hexafluoride

NO2

nitrogen dioxide

PF5

phosphorus pentafluoride

N 2O 4

dinitrogen tetroxide

P4O10

tetraphosphorus decaoxide

Table 2.11

110

Chapter 2 | Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

Names of Some Molecular Compounds Composed of Two Elements
Compound

Name

Compound

Name

N 2O 5

dinitrogen pentoxide

IF7

iodine heptafluoride

Table 2.11

There are a few common names that you will encounter as you continue your study of chemistry. For example,
although NO is often called nitric oxide, its proper name is nitrogen monoxide. Similarly, N2O is known as nitrous
oxide even though our rules would specify the name dinitrogen monoxide. (And H2O is usually called water, not
dihydrogen monoxide.) You should commit to memory the common names of compounds as you encounter them.

Example 2.14
Naming Covalent Compounds
Name the following covalent compounds:
(a) SF6
(b) N2O3
(c) Cl2O7
(d) P4O6

Solution
Because these compounds consist solely of nonmetals, we use prefixes to designate the number of atoms of
each element:
(a) sulfur hexafluoride
(b) dinitrogen trioxide
(c) dichlorine heptoxide
(d) tetraphosphorus hexoxide
